Get the biggest daily stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Masked gunmen have been caught on camera patrolling the streets of North Belfast.

The sinister gang - one of whom is believed to have been clutching an RPG launcher - was filmed in the Ardoyne area.

The video was circulated on social media on Monday but it is unsure when it was taken.

The so-called show of strength was caught on camera close to where father-of-four Michael McGibbon was murdered by a New IRA gang earlier this year.

The PSNI confirmed an investigation is under way into the video.

North Belfast Sinn Fein MLA Gerry Kelly said those in the film need to "wise up".

He added: "This is the same organisation that has been involved in extorting, intimidating, assaulting, facilitating drug dealers and murdering people in this community, including local taxi driver and father, Michael McGibbon.

"Their only war is with the people of Ardoyne. No one will be taken in by their appearance in fancy dress.

"They need to wind up, wise up and go away."

Earlier today, Northern Ireland Secretary James Brokenshire said the threat posed by terrorists in Northern Ireland remains severe.

Fermanagh and South Tyrone MP Tom Elliott said: “Today’s statement from the Secretary of State makes abundantly clear that the terrorist threat in Northern Ireland is not just a thing of the past, but unfortunately is alive and well in the present.

“The terrorist threat level in Northern Ireland remains ‘severe’, meaning that an attack is considered highly likely.

“The murder of prison officer Adrian Ismay back in March, demonstrated the lethal intent of dissident republican groups, who have been completely rejected by all sections of society in Northern Ireland, though continue to cause mayhem and destruction in our communities.

“The PSNI and our intelligence services must be commended for the work they do facing down terrorism at every turn, and it is noted in the Secretary of State’s statement that numerous dissident attacks have been prevented in the last six months.

“We must however be vigilant, and continue to do everything we can to put these terrorist groups out of business.”

PSNI Superintendent Darrin Jones said: "Police are aware of a video having been posted on a social media site. Enquiries are ongoing."