New project management articles published on the web during the week of August 22 – 28. And this week’s video: the late designer Bill Moggridge explains interaction design, one of the concepts used to design application software for the first laptop computer, the GRiD Compass. John Ellenby, who founded GRiD Systems in 1979, passed away this week. I was proud to work in GRiD’s federal systems division back in the 1980’s.

Must read!

Elizabeth Harrin interviews Ellen Maynes, 2016 Global Peace Fellow and project management educator. Attention, Dos Equis: Ellen is The Most Interesting Woman in the World.

Mike Cohn explains story points as an estimating tool, taking into account the amount of work to do, complexity, and uncertainty or risk. An excellent, thorough explanation!

John Goodpasture shows how game theory can be applied to external threats. Remember: your SWOT analysis is just the beginning.

Established Methods

Cornelius Fichtner interviews Lindsay Scott on the Arras People Project Management Benchmark Report 2016. An interesting analysis by the recruiters – just 31 minutes, safe for work.

Deanne Earle reflects on the Arras People Project Management Benchmark Report 2016. Why can’t organizations find the talent that they need?

Bertrand Duperrin describes the pros and cons of the Fourth Industrial Revolution – end-to-end digitization and integration of partners into the value chain.

Dmitriy Nizhebetskiy recommends five project management blogs that you should follow (including this one).

Amber Lee Dennis presents a primer on Data Lakes.

Shuba Kathikeyan shares two excellent infographics: the impact of poor software quality in business and a set of data center industry statistics and projections.

Pramod Jaiswal presents an infographic on developing a practical IT disaster recovery plan.

Agile Methods

Stefan Wolpers curates his weekly Food for Thought list of recommended Agile posts, articles, and so on.

Mike Griffiths describes some of the ways you can incorporate risk management into Agile methods.

Ryan Ripley interviews Agile coach Don Gray in a wide-ranging conversation that covers Agile transformation, models, and sources of insights. Just 40 minutes, safe for work.

Bart Gerardi debunks the notion that Agile is a way to eliminate a layer of management.

Belle B. Cooper explains the idea behind a personal hackathon, and uses Brian Nelson’s recent experience as source material.

Sam Sinha shares his tips for grooming the backlog.

Applied Leadership

Coert Visser recaps research into when positive feedback is more motivational, and when negative feedback moves us more.

Michael Lopp has just published the third edition of Managing Humans, in paperback and Kindle editions.

Bruce Harpham shares recommendations on twelve books for your reading table (or Kindle).

Peter Landau recommends another sixteen leadership and management books. Fortunately, there’s still nothing good on TV.

Working and the Workplace

Garland Coulson wants us to plan our day to accommodate those “low energy” periods, by scheduling the right tasks.

Harry Hall also recommends that we need to manage our energy, not just our time.

Brendan Toner reviews the best new Getting Things Done features of Zendone 2.0. Did you know they now have both iOS and Android apps?

Suzanne Lucas tells how five well-known companies help their employees work from home.

Lisette Sutherland answers an interesting question: how does a virtual team celebrate together? Just 7 minutes, safe for work.

Enjoy!

Share this: Tumblr

Pinterest

Print

