Former Butler star David Goldsmith (right) is carving out a role with the Indy Eleven. (Photo: Trevor Ruszkowski/Indy Eleven) Story Highlights Indy vs. Jacksonville, 6:30 p.m., Saturday, WISH-8

INDIANAPOLIS – David Goldsmith was used to starting and putting up gaudy numbers while setting the Big East ablaze at Butler last year. The rookie Indy Eleven forward quickly learned things don’t come so easily at the next level.

Goldsmith, Big East Co-Offensive Player of the Year, went unselected in the 2017 Major League Soccer SuperDraft. The Eleven, who play a tier lower in the North American Soccer League, brought him in for a preseason trial. The 23-year-old had to earn his spot. And he did.

“When he first came in on trial, he caught the coaching staff’s eye quite quickly,” said Eleven captain Colin Falvey. “Right off the bat, he made an impression that he was a good finisher. I think it took him a little bit of time when the season started to adjust to playing professional football. Coming from college is never easy.”

Former Butler star David Goldsmith (left) is carving out a role with the Indy Eleven. (Photo: Trevor Ruszkowski/Indy Eleven)

During Indy’s first six NASL matches this season, Goldsmith appeared just once for a total of two minutes. Since then, he’s made a cameo off the bench in eight of the past nine games.

“Every player wants to play every minute,” Goldsmith said. “They’d be lying to you if they said they didn’t. I’m just trying to work hard on the training field and sort of try to take my opportunities when I get on the field to make an impact on the game.”

Eleven coach Tim Hankinson bragged about Goldsmith’s development at practice this past week, hinting the former Butler attacker has recently been the MVP on the training grounds. Hankinson specifically cited shooting drills as Goldsmith’s area of expertise.

While he’s not yet stuffing the scoresheet — Goldsmith has just one assist so far — his performance in practice suggests that the goals, assists and created chances will come with more minutes. He’s also got two of the best forwards in the NASL to mentor him in Justin Braun and Eamon Zayed.

“You’ve got two good, experienced forwards ahead of him,” Falvey said. “The boys have been leaning on him and helping him. He’s very willing to learn to try to get better.”

Buy Photo FILE – Butler's David Goldsmith protects the ball from Indiana University's Grant Lillard during their match at Butler University, Sept. 16, 2015. (Photo: Matt Detrich/IndyStar)

Goldsmith credited facing Indy’s defenders in training, Falvey among them, for the rapid improvement of his game.

“It really helps me every day playing against players like Colin and (Daniel) Keller, these center backs that we have on our team. Myself being a rookie, I understand that my time will come. I have to be patient and just learn from the older, more experienced guys.”

Goldsmith, from Bristol, England, originally wasn’t sure what to make of the sport called “soccer” across the Atlantic Ocean.

“I didn’t really know what to expect exactly,” said Goldsmith of hearing U.S. soccer stereotypes prior to moving stateside. “I can’t say I watched too much American soccer. Being from England, I watched a lot of Premier League.

“(The stereotypes were) disproven. Especially in the last couple of years, MLS has really sort of grown with these great players who come from America and overseas.”

Indy will complete the spring season Saturday against Jacksonville Armada FC at Carroll Stadium, then it has a weekend off before starting its NASL fall campaign July 30 at FC Edmonton. If the Eleven are searching for a breakout player to provide the club a lift this autumn, they should look no further than their bench — at a rookie wearing the No. 20 jersey.

NEWSLETTERS Get the IndyStar Motor Sports newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong The latest news in IndyCar and the world of motor sports. Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-888-357-7827. Delivery: Sun - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for IndyStar Motor Sports Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

“I think it’s only a matter of time before you see him come off the bench and grab a goal,” Falvey added. “He’s definitely a natural goal-scorer.”

IF YOU GO:

Indy Eleven vs. Jacksonville Armada FC

Kickoff: 6:30 p.m. Saturday, Carroll Stadium.

TV: WISH-8.