As one of our loyal readers, we ask you to be our partner.

Dear Reader, As you can imagine, more people are reading The Jerusalem Post than ever before. Nevertheless, traditional business models are no longer sustainable and high-quality publications, like ours, are being forced to look for new ways to keep going. Unlike many other news organizations, we have not put up a paywall. We want to keep our journalism open and accessible and be able to keep providing you with news and analysis from the frontlines of Israel, the Middle East and the Jewish World.

Ismail Haniyeh, Hamas’ deputy political bureau chief in Gaza, said on Friday that the "Al-Aksa intifada has been revived and we intend to join," according to Channel 10.



In a sermon delivered on Friday, the Hamas leader said that "Jews are trying to take over the Al-Aksa mosque but they will not succeed."

The assailant approached the guard, stationed at the entrance of the bus terminal, armed with a knife.

She was shot and neutralized on the spot, and is being treated for moderate wounds.





Reuters contributed to this article

The claim that Jews are attempting to take control of the Temple Mount where the Al-Aksa mosque sits has been a common refrain that has stoked tensions in Israel and the West Bank.Haniyeh added that his terrorist organization intends to join the so called Palestinian uprising taking place that has seen a string of escalating violence over the past several days, Channel 10 added."We will liberate Al-Aksa and we as Gazans intend to join" the current upheaval, Haniyeh declared."We call for escalating and deepening the intifada... We are proud of you, the heroes of knives," Haniyeh added at Friday prayers. Friday alone has seen four terror attacks throughout Israel, with one coming at the hands of a Jewish extremist in Dimona.Three Palestinians were stabbed in the incident, with one in critical condition. Two remain in moderate condition, MDA reported Friday morning.Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu "strongly condemned" the attack in Dimona Friday morning."Israel is a state of law and order," he said, pledging to "bring justice to anyone using violence and breaking the law from any side."Shortly thereafter, 16-year-old was lightly injured in a stabbing attack in Jerusalem. The stabber was neutralized following the incident.Not long after, a police officer in Kiryat Arba was lightly injured after being stabbed by a terrorist who attempted to steal his weapon. The suspect was subsequently shot and killed.And the latest attack was carried out by a female terrorist who attempted to stab a security guard at the Afula central bus station.

Join Jerusalem Post Premium Plus now for just $5 and upgrade your experience with an ads-free website and exclusive content. Click here>>



