sorry mania i stole your formatting

osu!catch super gimmick mapping contest

Introduction / Rules



Have you ever wanted to map something or seen maps bend the rules to the utmost to where the most creative minds of CTB could be displayed? Today, I'll be announcing the arena where the top talents of CTB mapping will battle it out to create the ultimate map. A map which has nothing to hold it back from being everything it can be. If you're a fan of crazy maps like jujutsushi, brynhildr, or any other maps that masterfully break the rules, then this will be a sight to behold. We don't have as many methods as the other modes to do something as gimmicky as they can, but let's see how this goes :^)



The rules are simple.

Submission Rules

You will have only a month to map the song which is handed out. You can ONLY use this song and ONLY the .osz which is given to you by this contest. You're only allowed to submit the .osz with the background provided by the staff. This is to prevent judges from identifying you by your love live background. The map can only be a Catch the Beat osu!catch difficulty. This means that the map can NOT be a standard convert. The map must be passable. Any map that creates a scenario which instantly fails the user or crashes the game client will be instantly disqualified. Nothing NSFW can be used at all. The difficulty MUST be named [osu!catch > CTB].



Judging Rules

Only the gameplay can be taken into account. Something with a god tier storyboard but only 1 circle should NOT be acceptable. You are not allowed to submit anything of your own as a judge, or collaborate with any participant of this competition in ANY way. Your judgement must be fair in a way that does not prioritize maps of a certain style over others. This is a contest of creativity, not a contest of who can appeal to your BN ranking criteria the most (nub afb).



Beyond these rules anything goes. You can edit the .osu in any way you want past what is not allowed above. Be sure your map is submitted in .osz form to whoever is selected to pass the difficulties to judges. Have you ever wanted to map something or seen maps bend the rules to the utmost to where the most creative minds of CTB could be displayed? Today, I'll be announcing the arena where the top talents of CTB mapping will battle it out to create the ultimate map. A map which has nothing to hold it back from being everything it can be. If you're a fan of crazy maps like jujutsushi, brynhildr, or any other maps that masterfully break the rules, then this will be a sight to behold. We don't have as many methods as the other modes to do something as gimmicky as they can, but let's see how this goes :^)The rules are simple.Beyond these rules anything goes. You can edit the .osu in any way you want past what is not allowed above. Be sure your map is submitted in .osz form to whoever is selected to pass the difficulties to judges.

Judging Criteria Creativity (25 points) - Is the map creative? Does it use the same patterns over and over again? Flow / Structure (15 points) - Does the map have some kind of structure to it? Is it just a constant back and forth 1/16 hyperspam map with no flow or direction? Technical Skill (10 points) - does the mapper utilize a style that makes the map not only creative, but challenging and fun to play? Judge's Impression (10 points) - The judge's own feeling about the map itself outside of the above criteria Bonus points (5 points) - was it hitsounded in a way that amplified the map (2 points)? Did the mapper follow the basic submission rules (please guys 1 point)? Did the difficulty settings make sense? Or were they all raised to AR10 CS7 because the mapper is a douche (2 points)? Total Points: 65



The points will be added up for a total of the combined judges scores to get your final score. The points will be added up for a total of the combined judges scores to get your final score.

Prizes



To be announced. I'll be looking for official sponsorship from staff about this competition, but anyone who wants to donate supporter to this will have my thanks!

Schedule Preliminary Voting Stage: June 12 - June 25 .osz distribution (in this thread!): June 26 Mapping Phase: June 26 - July 31 Current Stage! Judging Phase / Prize Distribution: July 31 - August 7

Staff



If you'd like to be a judge, please contact me directly. Please note I will likely reject anyone who I do not find to be experienced / mature enough to handle it.



Organizer:



Ascendance



Judges:



- Magic Bomb -

Riari

koliron If you'd like to be a judge, please contact me directly. Please note I will likely reject anyone who I do not find to be experienced / mature enough to handle it.

Thanks to everyone, let's see how this goes