About

Because everybody deserves privacy and for their documents to remain theirs.

Over the past few years, cloud service providers like Dropbox have become the standard way to back-up and share digital content online. Dropbox is fast, reliable and easy to use but security in the cloud is however an area that requires dramatic improvements. With the increasing number and sophistication of cyber attacks and the escalating use of cloud service providers for back-ups and sharing, the need for security is greater than ever. Because everybody deserves privacy and for their documents to remain theirs : That’s where Qi comes in !

What is Qi™?

Qi is a secure token that runs on top of Dropbox allowing you to secure all your files independently of their type, both within your Dropbox account and on your local computer(s). This means securing photos, word documents, spreadsheets, PDFs and more. Only you, with your Qi, can access the files. You are also able to share them securely with friends and colleagues.

Here’s how Qi™ works

Qi is a secure token that runs on top of Dropbox allowing you to secure all your files anywhere, anytime. Documents are encrypted, “wrapped around”, on the fly locally and before reaching Dropbox. Documents can only be accessed, opened and edited when your Qi is plugged into a USB port. This means that with Qi your Dropbox files are always secure.

Securing Dropbox has never been easier. Qi is engineered for simplicity and the concept is simple – when Qi is plugged in and you double click on a file in Dropbox, the digital content is opened. Without Qi plugged in, the file cannot be opened. When you close a file or unplug Qi your files are automatically re-encrypted. This ensures encryption takes place at all times, preventing the risk of files being left unencrypted by mistake. There is no document stored on Qi, all the files are encrypted in Dropbox.

Sharing photos and other documents securely with friends and colleagues is also possible. Qi users directly receive files in their Dropbox and if you don’t have a Qi, no problem. You can still receive files by email.

Qi adds a layer of security that is transparent to the user while leveraging the benefits of Dropbox (ease of use, fast synchronization, easy sharing). You simply have to install a small program that runs on your computer and connects Qi with your Dropbox account. There is no user interface and using files remains the same. The way you have always done it is the way it continues to be. Comprehensive security on your computer(s), in your Dropbox account and while sharing with others – that’s Qi.

The technology behind Qi™

Qi uses two factor authentication, military grade encryption (each file is encrypted with a unique encryption key using the AES-256 algorithm - US Department of Defense approved), proprietary patent-pending key management and anti-forensics technology to provide bulletproof security while focusing on ease of use.

The technology is transparent to the user as all cryptography and key management is done in the background to maintain the Dropbox user experience.

Qi works on both Mac and Windows operating systems.

The security guy behind the vision

Qi is the invention of Dr. Cédric Jeannot, a security researcher and entrepreneur. Dr. Jeannot received his PhD in Applied Security from the University of Louisville, KY and has extensive expertise in many areas of digital security including, cryptography, authentication, key management and forensic approaches. He is the author of several research papers and a patent-pending secure architecture for digital content protection in corporate environments. As a world renowned security expert and international speaker on the topics of cyber security and corporate espionage, many rely on Dr. Jeannot’s opinion on digital security matters.

Qi has been designed and built by Dr. Jeannot and his team of security professionals. They cumulatively bring 27+ years of experience in the field of security and come from mathematics, physics and computer science backgrounds. Together they have previously built security products and services for Fortune 500 companies and Governments.

Where are we now and why we need your help

Dr. Jeannot came up with the concept of Qi, following multiple demands from fellow entrepreneurs that were in the same technology incubator. Most start ups used Dropbox to back up and share their documents but recognized that it was lacking appropriate security. They needed a solution they could count on to secure their intellectual property and share sensitive files with advisers, investors, and VCs. They wanted to keep using Dropbox because it was easy, convenient and inexpensive but wanted more security. Keeping in mind that the user experience was also a top priority, Qi was born !

At this point, Qi is ready for production. Over the past 8 months, we've come a long way in the development and now have a production-ready solution. We need to refine our manufacturing process and place our first production order. Although we are ready for production, we need the necessary funding to mass produce the Qi secure token. A successful Kickstarter campaign will allow us to keep the per unit cost down which in turn will allow us to keep pricing at a reasonable level.

Development and production locations

Producing a security product overseas is typically never a wise thing and that is why all our software is developed in-house by our industry leading experts and quality-conscious personnel. We work with local state-of-the-art manufacturing facilities and our partners range from an IPC member and ISO-2000 certified electronics manufacturer to a global leader in liquid injection molding for the medical, automotive and consumer electronics products.

Project timeline to fulfillment

Project funding completion – early October 2013

Production order placement – mid-October 2013

Volume production completion – end of 2013

Shipments to Kickstarter backers – early 2014

Product general release to public – spring 2014





FAQ

Does Qi complement or replace Dropbox ?

Complement. Qi is an add-on to Dropbox that allows you to use Dropbox in a secure way (including local copies of files and sharing ).

Is sharing limited to other Qi users ?

No. You can share documents securely with other Qi users but if a user does not have a Qi, you can chose to send the files unencrypted or chose not to send them.

Can Qi work with Box or other cloud services ?

Soon. At this point Qi is only available as an add-on to Dropbox. This being said, we are working on integrating Qi with other cloud providers such as Box, Google Drive and Microsoft SkyDrive.

Are my files stored on Qi ?

No, Qi is not a storage device. The files are stored in Dropbox. Qi acts as a secure gateway to encrypt and decrypt files on the fly.

Does it work on MAC ?

Yes. Qi works on both Windows ( Xp, Vista, 7, 8 ) and MAC ( from 10.6 ).