Most VR games on Steam Greenlight are usually some sort of shovelware scam that are thrown together with little to no effort put in them. To my surprise though, developer Nordic Trolls put some time into their VR game Karnage Chronicles and posted the project to Greenlight. The upcoming VR game set for Q1 2017 is currently seeking votes on Steam Greenlight.

The video for the game Karnage Chronicles is little more than a teaser trailer, but it’s all in-game footage. This means that the game is actually playable in the state that it’s currently in (despite that the devs are still fixing some things), and the video also tells us that the co-op mode is actually functional instead of the devs just saying that it’s in the game — as seen in the image below.

The game is said by the devs to be a linear adventure game, but at the same time they did note that they want some aspects of exploration and secrets to be in the game. In other words, the indie devs don’t want to bite off more than they can chew and want to make a game that can be completed, but provide some substance (secrets and exploration) for VR goers to enjoy.

The description for Karnage Chronicles can be read below.

“What path would you choose when your world is threatened by horrors unseen and forces so strong they can manipulate Magic itself? Wield blade, bow, or the primal elements and journey through snowy mountains, enchanted caverns, and abandoned fortresses to defeat the growing army of the Shroud.“

Furthermore, Karnage Chronicles is said to be an action-heavy, co-op RPG title for VR fans. Although the devs claim that there are more enemies and weapons that will cross your path, the devs at least had the audacity to whip up some concept art to show curious gamers what other stuff is currently in the works for the game, which is visible for you to look over.

You can check out the new teaser trailer for Karnage Chronicles, courtesy of Nordic Trolls channel.

For Greenlight VR standards, this game blows a lot of other entries on the platform out of the water.

Lastly, the game will feature 1-4 player co-op, online multiplayer, and four classes to pick from. For more information regarding Karnage Chronicles and Nordic Trolls you can visit Steam Greenlight or karnagechronicles.com.