With all the chaos surrounding the President-elect this week (see Donald Trump Body Slams BuzzFeed, CNN For Fake Russian ‘Report’ and Trump Campaign BLASTS Unsourced, Unsubstantiated Russian ‘Intelligence’ Report), people were caught off guard by this tweet about L.L. Bean:

Thank you to Linda Bean of L.L.Bean for your great support and courage. People will support you even more now. Buy L.L.Bean. @LBPerfectMaine — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) January 12, 2017

Seems Trump might have referred to the wrong Bean by his phrasing. @LBPerfectMaine is indeed Linda Bean, but it isn’t L.L. Bean’s Twitter account*. Regardless, I’m now in the mood for some Maine lobster. What happened, apparently, is that L.L. Bean was added to a list of stores to boycott over “the store’s support of Trump.” The rub is it wasn’t the company as a whole as much as one member of the family being a vocal Trump supporter. This is usually the part of the story where the company caves, bans that family member from Christmas dinner and cuts a check to Planned Parenthood or Al Sharpton. All while promoting “love, diversity, and tolerance.” Hugs and gay kisses.

Instead, L.L. Bean pushed back…

So to “Grab Out Wallet,” the store basically says this…

Seriously, what a breath of all organically sourced, free range fresh air for a company to stand up to the bitter left. The bitter left, which is now going plaid over Trump’s tweet about L.L. Bean. I’d totally shop there on principle now if I liked their clothes at all. This is one step forward.

Here’s the thing, what L.L. Bean did by defending their own (in contrast to places like FireFox), saying their board, their team, their employees have different opinions, and we stay out of politics, is only going to buoy their reputation and their sales. It was smart. There will even be some intellectually honest liberals who will agree with L.L. Bean here, and “Grab Your Wallet” will lose. Bad form.

Yes, there are intellectually honest liberals. Be sensible.

Have you seen Donald Trump thug life? The next four years hold some fun…

*Correction made about Linda Bean’s Twitter account.

NOT SUBSCRIBED TO THE PODCAST? FIX THAT! IT’S COMPLETELY FREE ON BOTH ITUNES HERE AND SOUNDCLOUD HERE.