BEDMINSTER, N.J. -- Some of the best golfers in the world are competing in New Jersey this weekend -- and vying for attention with a guy whose best finish was an age-group club title.

That would be President Donald Trump.

The president's arrival at his club on Friday created such a commotion that crowds at the U.S. Women's Open were asked to keep it down as golfers Lexi Thompson, Brook Henderson and Stacy Lewis approached the 15th green.

Trump, fresh off a quick trip to France, turned up in a glassed-off patio of the clubhouse with son Eric by his side.

President @realDonaldTrump arrives at #USWomensOpen at his New Jersey golf club Friday afternoon. pic.twitter.com/i1AQ2xgB61 — Bill Fields (@BillFields1) July 14, 2017

Acknowledging the crowds, the president waved, pointed and gave a thumbs-up, which prompted squeals from a group of schoolgirls. Dozens of people swarmed around the clubhouse snapping photos and waving as the president occasionally approached the window.

Trump's presence did pose a distraction to players. Chinese golfer Shanshan Feng said she could hear crowds screaming for the president from the 15th green.

Editor's Picks President Trump draws crowd at LPGA major Some golfers remained focused. Others waited for the motorcade to pass through. President Donald Trump's appearance Friday at the U.S. Women's Open at Trump National Bedminster caught the attention of everyone on the course.

Feng extends Women's Open lead to 2 after 70 Shanshan Feng shot a 2-under 70 and had a 36-hole total of 8-under 136 on the 6,732-yard Trump National Golf Club, which played longer because of rain the past two days. 1 Related

Asked if she could tell which direction the crowds were looking, Thompson told reporters, "not toward the golf."

Trump's visit during the weekend tournament also poses a security challenge because his residence is on the course, where fans and players pass by throughout the day.

But the tournament's director said of Trump's visit: "We're ready."

Trump tweeted Friday morning that he was headed to New Jersey to attend the tournament after spending time in France this week to celebrate Bastille Day and meet with French President Emmanuel Macron.

Left Paris for U.S.A. Will be heading to New Jersey and attending the#USWomensOpen, their most important tournament, this afternoon. — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) July 14, 2017

The event was expected to draw protesters critical of the U.S. Golf Association, which operates the tournament, for not moving it to a different venue after audio surfaced last year in which Trump made derogatory comments about women.

Trump has spent several weekends at the club since his election in November but none during an event of this magnitude: 156 golfers and their entourages and thousands of fans.

Trump is the first sitting U.S. president to attend a U.S. Women's Open.

Two presidents -- Warren Harding in 1921 and Bill Clinton in 1997 -- attended the U.S. Open while in office. Harding presented the trophy and gold medal to winner Jim Barnes at Columbia Country Club in Chevy Chase, Maryland. Clinton and his daughter, Chelsea, watched final-round action from a specially constructed stand on the 16th hole at Congressional Country Club.

When the U.S. Open returned to Congressional in 2011, the USGA prepared a viewing platform for President Barack Obama in the event that he attended, but he did not come to the championship.

Information from ESPN contributor Bill Fields was used in this report.