seahawks fans

After a trade with the San Francisco 49ers that would have brought safety L.J. McCray to Seattle fell through, the Seattle Times is reporting that the Seahawks will fill the open spot on their 53-man roster by resigning Tani Tupou.

Seattle had plans of adding both Dewey McDonald from Oakland and McCray to their secondary before the trade with the 49ers fell apart because of conditions revolving around the physical. The Seahawks were originally going to give San Francisco a conditional seventh-round pick in the 2018 NFL Draft for the safety, but now have a chance to sign McCray without additional compensation, if he is waived by the 49ers. McCray was only able to play in eight games during the 2015 season after suffering a torn ACL. It is still unclear exactly what prevented the defensive back from passing his physical on Monday.

Scroll to continue with content Ad

The Seahawks final 53-man roster didn’t have a fullback heading into the first week of the regular season after they released Will Tukuafu and waived Tupou on Saturday. The Seahawks will have the option to bring Tukuafu back on the roster after week one without a guaranteed salary.

AROUND COVER32

Seahawks: Betting big on 2016 rookies

Seahawks: Why cutting Jahri Evans is a good thing

Preseason: Winners and losers around the NFL

Highlights: Watch the best of Preseason Week 4

Fantasy Football Taking a chance on Prescott

Fantasy Football: Seven people you meet at an auction draft

Story continues

After signing with the Seahawks as an undrafted rookie free agent, Tupou played both fullback and defensive tackle throughout the summer and preseason.He played at the defensive tackle position during college at the University of Washington and has picked up the fullback responsibilities relatively easy so far. Tupou will become the 15th rookie on the roster for Seattle, and the seventh who has signed without being drafted.

The move is a perfect example of while the rosters became final on Saturday, they are still subject to change. On Sunday, following the league’s deadline for teams to have put their final rosters together, the Seahawks made a change at the defensive tackle position by waiving Justin Hamilton in order to claim Garrison Smith from the 49ers.

The post Seahawks to resign Tani Tupou appeared first on Cover32.