A MAN REPORTED that a teenager attacked him at about 4 p.m. Wednesday, April 19, on a CTA bus in the 4600 block of Montrose Avenue, according to 17th (Albany Park) District police.

The 60-year-old man reported that he asked a group of five or six teenagers on the bus to be quiet and an argument ensued between them one of them hit him in the head with an unknown object and sprayed his face with a chemiccal spray before the teens exited the bus, according to police.

The man was transported to Community First Hospital, police said.

AN EMPLOYEE of the TCF Bank in the Jewel-Osco store, 3570 N. Elston Ave., reported that the bank was robbed at about 3:25 p.m. Monday, April 24, according to 17th (Albany Park) District police.

The bank teller reported that a man approached the counter and displayed a note announcing a robbery and he gave the man $4,017 from the money and the man exited the store, according to police.

All videos recorded on the surveillance systems of the bank, store and nearby businesses are being processed by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, police said.

The suspect was described by police as a white male between the ages of 30 and 40 with strawberry-blonde hair, a weight between 140 to 180 pounds and a height between 5-foot-7-inches and 5-foot-10-inches, according to police.

AN EMPLOYEE of the Admiral Theater, 3936 W. Lawrence Ave., reported that a man threatened him with a box cutter at about 2:10 a.m. Friday, April 21, according to 17th (Albany Park) District police.

The man reported that two men attempted to enter the business and that after they were denied entry, the men began throwing items at him and the building, and that one of the men pointed a box cutter at him before they fled in a gray Mercedes C155, according to police.









TWO MEN AND a woman reported that they were robbed at gunpoint at about 11:05 p.m. Wednesday, April 19, while they were sitting in separate vehicles in the alley in the 4700 block of North Central Park Avenue, according to 17th (Albany Park) District police.

A 22-year-old man reported that while he was sitting in his vehicle, a man wearing a mask approached him, pointed a handgun at him, demanded money and took a set of car keys and his wallet containing identification cards and $224 in cash from him, according to police. The man reported that the man proceeded to rob another vehicle in the alley before he entered a vehicle containing LED lights with another man and they drove away police said.

A 37-year-old man and a 50-year-old woman sitting in a separate vehicle in the alley reported that a man wearing a mask approached them, pointed a handgun at them, demanded their possessions and took the woman’s vehicle keys and cell phone and the man’s cell phone from them, according to police. The man and woman reported that they observed the man was with another man and that both men entered a vehicle containing LED lights and drove away, police said.

A MAN REPORTED that he was robbed at about 5:20 p.m. Sunday, April 23, in the 4700 block of North Spaulding Avenue, according to 17th (Albany Park) District police.

The 23-year-old man reported that he had made arrangements online through Facebook to purchase a cell phone from a woman and that when he arrived to meet her at the intersection of Leland and Spaulding avenues, two men approached him and one of the men pointed a semi-automatic handgun at him and took $450 in cash, police said.

A MAN AND a woman reported that they were robbed at about 12:40 a.m. Monday, April 24, in the 4300 block of West Irving Park Road, according to 17th (Albany Park) District police.

The 40-year-old man and 61-year-old woman reported that while they were walking home, two men approached them and one of the men pointed a handgun at the woman’s back while the other man pointed a handgun in the woman’s face and said, "Stick ’em up, hand over your wallets," according to police. The man and woman reported that the men took the man’s cell phone valued at $30 and the woman’s cell phone valued at $60, police said.

A MAN REPORTED that his residence in the 6000 block of North Jersey Avenue was burglarized between 4:50 p.m. and 10:40 p.m. Friday, April 21, according to 17th (Albany Park) District police.

The man reported that when he returned home, he observed the kitchen door had been opened and various items were thrown around the residence, and discovered that his iPad valued at $300 was missing, according to police.

LINCOLNWOOD

A WOMAN reported that her vehicle was burglarized between 7:45 p.m. Wednesday, April 19, and 7:45 a.m. the following day, while it was parked in the 3800 block of West Wallen Avenue, according to Lincolnwood police.

The woman reported that when she returned to her vehicle, she discovered that the front door had been opened and items from the glove compartment and center arm rest console were scattered inside the vehicle, and a pair of Coach sandals valued at $150 and about $20 in change were missing, according to police.