4K MEDIA LICENSING DEALS BRING

NEW Yu-Gi-Oh! COLLECTIBLES

Funko and GameStop to Introduce More Yu-Gi-Oh! Branded Products Globally

4K Media Inc., the Konami Digital Entertainment, Inc. subsidiary that manages the Yu-Gi-Oh! brand outside of Asia, today announced it has signed licensing agreements with both Funko, a purveyor of pop culture and licensed-focused collectibles, and GameStop, a global retailer of specialty brands and games.

The two deals – negotiated and announced by Jennifer Coleman, Vice President of Licensing and Marketing at 4K Media – bring a new array of Yu-Gi-Oh! collectibles to the worldwide marketplace (outside of Asia).

“We are elated to welcome both Funko and GameStop to the Yu-Gi-Oh! family. We are impressed with both companies’ creative designs for new and engaging collectibles encompassing so many of our central characters and monsters,” said Coleman. “Yu-Gi-Oh! fans around the globe eagerly await each new licensed product introduction, which not only keeps the brand fresh and front of mind, but also serves to invigorate demand for all things Yu-Gi-Oh!”

Funko will be launching a line of stylized vinyl collectible figures and other related products focusing on the fans’ favorite Yu-Gi-Oh! characters and monsters.

Funko CEO Brian Mariotti said, “We’re tremendously excited about Funko’s development of a Yu-Gi-Oh! collectibles line and are honored to be associated with a brand that continues to entertain and engage fans that span such a broad demographic around the world.”

GameStop is also creating a distinctive line of 4-inch Yu-Gi-Oh! collectible figurines available to Yu-Gi-Oh! fans on its on its website(s) and in its stores, as well as in many of its partners’ stores around the world.

“Yu-Gi-Oh! has had nice success as a trading card game, which makes the brand an ideal fit with GameStop, as one of the largest suppliers of the cards globally” added Alex Jones, Senior Manager of Licensed Products – International at GameStop. “Our loyal game playing customers will be thrilled with this new array of exclusive Yu-Gi-Oh! collectible characters we will be introducing to our stores.”