I don’t go to the Drudge Report anymore, so I only heard about this screaming headline second-hand when it was being crowed about on Twitter. But the headline read: “TRUMP MOST VOTES IN REPUBLICAN HISTORY.” Wowie. Well, ain’t that impressive? But then there is the other side of the coin.

According to Philip Bump at the Washington Post , though he has yet to hit that mark of having the most primary votes in Republican history (George W. Bush holds that record), by the end of the 2016 primary season, Donald Trump probably will exceed Bush’s 2000 totals.

Now, here’s the other side of the coin.

Trump also will be another historic first. In addition to garnering the most primary votes in Republican history, Donald J. Trump will also hold the record for having the most primary votes against him.

Take a look:



Graph from the Washington Post

Well, sweet merciful Zeus!

The primary season isn’t even over yet and already the anti-Trump vote is solidly the most “anti” votes in Republican history. Nearly fifteen million Republican primary voters have said no to Trump.

Fifteen million. That’s quite a hefty number.

Philip Bump closes his piece with this:

This isn’t a critique of Trump, really. The math is simple: Lots of people voting for lots of different candidates means that the guy in first got a lot of votes — but so did the aggregation of everyone else.



The lesson to take from this is that the truly historic component of the 2016 Republican contest isn’t the number of votes Trump is getting or that his opponents have earned. It’s that so many people in total have come out to vote. Of course, contra Trump’s insistence that he’s bringing people out in droves to give him their support, an awful lot of those people would rather vote for someone else.

I wonder if Drudge ever will point this out?

Probably not.

—

If you like the work at Patriot Retort, please consider contributing

Hit the tip jar DONATE button in the side bar. Even a few bucks can make a world of difference!