One click, total system optimization

Get robust overclocking, energy savings, digital power, customized fan control and tailored networking and audio settings

One click takes care of all that complex tuning. Your PC is smart with ASUS 5-Way Optimization. It dynamically optimizes essential aspects of your system based on real-time use – so you get superb CPU performance, everyday energy savings, ultra-stable digital power, cool and quiet fans and now even networking and audio settings that are tailored for the apps that you are using. In short, 5-Way Optimization ensures that your PC is perfect for gaming, entertainment, productivity or just about anything else!





Games run swiftly and smoothly with high performance, prioritized bandwidth and vivid sound

Fans stay whisper-quiet for everyday computing and ensure extreme cooling efficiency when gaming

Movies play without stutter

Energy waste is reduced so you'll save money

*Testing configuration: Intel LGA1150 i7-4770K | Z97-DELUXE | Delta AUB0812VH | AVEXIR 1600 AVD3U16001104G-4CI x 2 | EN9600GT MG/HTDP/512MD2/A x 1 | Seagate ST500DM002-500G x 1



**Intel LGA1150 i7-4765T 35W | Z97-DELUXE | SanDisk SSD 64 GB | SUPER FLOWER_SF-350P14XE_350W | ASUS PA238Q 23" | Kingston KHX1600C9D3LK2/8GX

CPU Performance boost

TPU

Unleash your PC's full performance with a simple two-phase onboard switch or the ASUS AI Suite 3 utility! The Turbo Processor Unit (TPU) offers precise voltage control and advanced monitoring for the CPU and the graphics card, enabling great freedom to adjust CPU frequencies and ratios for optimized performance and to exploit the potential out of your graphics card*.

*Refer to graphics card QVL

All-round energy efficiency

EPU

With the Energy Processing Unit (EPU) you will enjoy from system-wide real-time power savings, controlled via a simple onboard switch or the AI Suite 3 utility. EPU detects and adjusts power consumption according to the PC's needs – automatically. It can also reduce CPU wattage to an indicated level or enjoy even more savings with Away Mode, which creates an extreme energy-saving scenario by shutting down unused extra I/O controllers and reduces the graphics cards' power level while you're away, so the PC consumes only the energy it needs – and not a drop more!

Advanced fan controls for ultimate cooling and quietness

EPU

Fan Xpert 3 puts 4-pin/3-pin CPU and case fan controls in one place. It scans each fan's characteristics and delivers custom settings for each fan based on the dedicated area temperatures detected by hardware thermal sensors. Make sure every fan achieves the best balance of cooling performance and low noise. Fan Xpert 3 supports hardware-level PWM/DC combo mode for both the CPU and case fans. It even can reduce the CPU fan speed to below the default minimum, for extra-quiet and power saving operation during light loads.

Precise Digital Power Control

DIGI+ Power Control

Power control is one of the most essential motherboard designs. Intelligent CPU power draw detection with ASUS DIGI+ Power Control is an innovative, industry-leading technology that fully complies with Intel® VRD12.5 specifications, increasing overclocking potential, enhancing system stability, and improving power efficiency with superior flexibility and accurate control.

Game faster, rank higher

Turbo App

The distant sound of enemy footsteps. You turn, focus, and unleash a crackle of rapid gunfire. Another frag for you! As a gamer, you know that only the swiftest actions win the game, and that's why you need exclusive ASUS Turbo App – an intuitive tuning panel to boost everything to secure your victory in your favorite titles! Overclock your CPU, prioritize game data across your network and optimize the audio settings for fantastically clear audio and in-game-chat. History is written by the victors, so don't go to war without Turbo App.