Q: I don't understand why they play back-to-back games in the preseason. Doesn't the Heat have control over who and when they play? -- Marcelo.

A: They have control over when their home games are played. But teams also try to schedule on the weekends as much as possible, which is why it's Saturday in Houston and Sunday in Atlanta coming up. Plus, preseason games don't generate as much revenue as regular-season games, with little to no walkup sales, so teams tend to schedule them around and potential higher-revenue events. But I agree that the same teams who express such concern about regular-season back-to-backs would be wise to be vigilant in the preseason, as well. The counterargument is that teams can carry up to 20 players in the preseason, so there is not as much stress on players, which the minutes relatively limited for the starters. Also, as has been explained to me by an NBA executive, teams sometimes prefer clustering their exhibitions, so they also can cluster their practices, without have to stop for constant travel.

Q: Five preseason games are left to build cohesion with a starting lineup that's never played together. Is this is now a concern? -- Daniel.

A: I would like to downplay the preseason and say the time missed by Hassan Whiteside is not a concern. But it is. After Tuesday's game in Orlando, he will have missed all of training camp and half of the preseason with his calf strain. This team can't get on the same page until all its primary pieces are in place. And you know that Erik Spoelstra is not going to play all of his regulars in both Saturday's game in Houston and Sunday's game Atlanta. So the Heat basically have three exhibitions, at best, when the projected starting lineup can play together (and that's only if Whiteside is back by this weekend, although he told me he will try to practice later this week). A lack of continuity destroyed last season and it's not as if the Heat have found the antidote in camp. Remember, the schedule is heavily home-loaded at the start of the regular season. Fail to take advantage of that and it could prove particularly difficult to overcome, especially with the eclipse of road games in January.

Q: Giving James Ennis, Justise Winslow, Josh Richardson and Tyler Johnson more playing time during the preseason is meant to build their own confidence. -- Aura.

A: First, with no offense to the others, don't group Winslow with those other three. He's at a different place in the rotation, and he needs as much NBA exposure as he can get during the preseason. I'm still not sold on Ennis getting a roster spot, especially if he holds to the contract clause where he becomes fully guaranteed for the season. As for Richardson, the thinking could be that he eventually will get all the seasoning he needs in the D-League, with the Sioux Falls Skyforce. Johnson already has had plenty of NBA exposure, so I'm sure he would be ready if needed. He looked good Monday playing as the first point guard off the bench.