Daily Show host Trevor Noah and someone who once compared Black Lives Matter activists to the Ku Klux Klan reportedly met for "peace" drinks Thursday night. Noah and Blaze commentator Tomi Lahren held a "peace summit" following their much-discussed Daily Show discussion, TMZ reported. In fact, Lahren seemingly spoke at length with TMZ after the meeting and said she is ready to return to Noah's show.

Tomi Lahren -- Peace Summit with Trevor Noah ... As for Dating a Black Guy ... (VIDEO + PHOTOS) https://t.co/GAADI39bpN — TMZ (@TMZ) December 2, 2016

"It was two people having a great conversation," Lahren said after being spotted at the Bowery Hotel with Noah. "You can be friends with people you disagree with." When asked about the online response to the interview, Lahren brushed it off. "You're going to watch me either way," she said, adding that she appreciated Noah's invitation and was "ready for round 2."

Trevor and @TomiLahren discuss Black Lives Matter, the KKK, and Colin Kaepernick’s national anthem protest. https://t.co/3ZXncZSVdm pic.twitter.com/8YrybRYRBX — The Daily Show (@TheDailyShow) December 1, 2016

Lahren and Noah also exchanged niceties on Twitter Friday, with Noah calling for the destruction of all bubbles:

To my fans: Trevor Noah is not a douche or a jerk. To Trevor's fans: I'm not a bitch or c*nt. We are people with opposing views. That's it. — Tomi Lahren (@TomiLahren) December 1, 2016

Thank you for being my guest Tomi. Our goal should be to destroy these "bubbles" not each other. You're always welcome on my show. https://t.co/AairL3cdAy — Trevor Noah (@Trevornoah) December 1, 2016

Lahren's Black Lives Matter comments were discussed during the initial interview, with Noah pointing out the hypocrisy in many so-called conservatives' views on the activist group. "You are the same person who argued on your show that just because Trump has supporters from the KKK doesn't mean he's in the KKK," Noah said. "What if somebody said, 'I felt emboldened by Tomi Lahren so I went out and shot black people'? Are you now responsible?"