South Korean mobile phone maker LG Electronics has been rumored for quite some time now to be working on the release of a smaller version of its LG G3 flagship, and it seems that the handset has already received approvals for a landing in the United States.

Earlier this week, the handset was spotted in China in the form of LG G3 Beat, but it is expected to become available internationally under the name of LG G3 mini.

The handset has made an appearance over at the FCC with model number D725 attached to it, and is said to be en route to the network of wireless carrier AT&T.

To be more precise, the smartphone comes to shelves with support for this wireless carrier’s LTE bands (2, 4, 5 and 17), which clearly suggests that it will be added to the company’s lineup shortly, as mylgphones points out.

While there’s no official confirmation on this being the aforementioned LG G3 mini smartphone, all of the latest leaks on it suggest that it would arrive on the market under this name.

In fact, a certain LG D724 handset has been spotted on the Indian import tracking site Zauba with a 4.5-inch touchscreen display, which is smaller than the screen of G3 Beat.

However, the FCC listing shows that LG D725 measures 136.4mm x 69.8mm, and that it sports a 5-inch (127.0mm) screen, the same as the Chinese counterpart.

For those out of the loop, we should note that LG G3 is expected to feature an IPS LCD screen capable of delivering a 720p resolution, and that is should be powered by a 1.2GHz quad-core Qualcomm Snapdragon 400 processor.

LG G3 mini at the FCC

Moreover, the smartphone is said to sport 2GB of RAM, along with 16GB of internal memory, and a microSD memory card slot for expansion purposes, while being powered by a 2540mAh battery.

On the back, it should feature an 8-megapixel camera with Optical Image Stabilization, flash and full HD video recording, paired with a 2MP front camera for making video calls while on the go.

What remains to be seen is whether LG will continue the tradition and will include rear-mounted power and volume buttons on LG G3 mini, the same as it did with LG G3 and other models before it.

The upcoming smartphone is expected to run under the Android 4.4.2 KitKat right from the start, and should also sport LG’s user interface loaded on top right from the start.

No specific info on when the LG G3 mini might arrive on shelves at AT&T has been provided as of now, but we can expect it to go official in the not-too-distant future, so stay tuned for more on it.