Once again, classical music-loving travelers will be faced with a staggering abundance of performance options at the hundreds of music festivals that dot the American summer landscape. Following is a selective guide to some of the more interesting, promising and/or noteworthy cultural destinations, presented by region and in alphabetical order. As always, programs and dates are subject to change and should be verified.

Midwest

Cincinnati May Festival, May 19-27; Cincinnati: The city's oldest arts organization welcomes Gerard McBurney as creative partner for a series of concerts including Bach's B-minor Mass (led by Harry Bicket), Beethoven's Ninth Symphony, Elgar's "The Dream of Gerontius" and more. Other conductors include Markus Stenz, Michael Francis and Matthew Halls. Pending the completion of the renovation of Cincinnati Music Hall, performances will take place at the Taft Theater. 513-381-3300, www.mayfestival.com

Des Moines Metro Opera, June 23-July 16; Simpson College, Indianola, Iowa: The highlight of the 45th festival summer promises to be Benjamin Britten's "Billy Budd," in a new edition by Britten scholar Steuart Bedford. Rounding out the schedule will be Sondheim's "A Little Night Music," Piazzolla's "Maria de Buenos Aires" and Puccini's "Turandot." 515-961-6221; www.dmmo.org

Minnesota Orchestra Sommerfest, July 21-Aug. 5; Minneapolis: Two milestones will be observed — Andrew Litton's 15th and final season as artistic director and the 90th birthday of trumpeter Doc Severinsen, Sommerfest's Pops conductor laureate. Litton's operatic finale will be a concert version of Strauss' "Salome," starring Patricia Racette. 612-371-5656; www.minnesotaorchestra.org

North Shore Chamber Music Festival, June 7-10; Village Presbyterian Church, 1300 Shermer Road, Northbrook: Directors Vadim Gluzman, violin, and Angela Yoffe, piano, will preside over the seventh edition, which will include performances by the Escher String Quartet; a mostly Mozart gala with the ProMusica Chamber Orchestra of Columbus, Ohio, under David Danzmayr; and pianist-composer Adam Neiman leading the festival's first commissioned work. 847-370-3984; www.nscmf.org

Opera Theater of St. Louis, May 20-June 25; Loretto-Hilton Center, Webster University, Webster Groves, Mo.: The 45th festival of operas in English will bring the U.S. premiere of Philip Glass' "The Trial," based on Franz Kafka's novel; a new performing version of "The Grapes of Wrath" by Ricky Ian Gordon; Puccini's "Madame Butterfly"; and Mozart's "Titus" ("La Clemenza di Tito"). 312-961-0044; www.experienceopera.org

Peninsula Music Festival, Aug. 1-19; Door Community Auditorium, Fish Creek, Wis.: Surrounded by the natural beauty of Door County, the 65th summer fest under music director Victor Yampolsky will emphasize the music of Dvorak and his contemporaries in three programs. Soloists include pianists Vasily Primakov and Jon Kimura Parker; violinists James Ehnes and Anna Lee; and cellist Mark Kosower. 920-854-4060; www.musicfestival.com

West

Aspen Music Festival and School, June 29-Aug. 20; Aspen, Colo.: With more than 400 orchestral concerts, recitals, master classes and world premieres, the 69th season offers something for practically every musical taste, with the Colorado Rockies as a magnificent backdrop. "Enchantment" is the theme for programs under music director Robert Spano, including Berlioz's "The Damnation of Faust" and Ravel's "L'enfant et les Sortileges." Soloists include Renee Fleming, Sarah Chang, Gil Shaham, Marc-Andre Hamelin, Conrad Tao, Jean-Yves Thibaudet and Sharon Isbin. 970-925-9042; www.aspenmusicfestival.com

Bravo! Vail Music Festival, June 22-Aug. 3; Vail, Colo.: The 30th season will feature residencies by the New York Philharmonic, Philadelphia Orchestra, Dallas Symphony and Academy of St. Martin in the Fields. Five commissioned works will receive world premieres. Dozens of performances and programs for all ages will feature such guest artists as Leonidas Kavakos, Steven Isserlis and Yefim Bronfman, framed by the scenic vistas of Vail Valley. 877-812-5700; www.bravovail.org

Cabrillo Festival of Contemporary Music, July 30-Aug. 12; Santa Cruz, Calif.: America's longest-running festival of new orchestral works celebrates the arrival of Cristian Macelaru as music director with a series of commissions that further its commitment to the music of today. Composers in residence include Clarice Assad, Gerald Barry, William Bolcom, Michael Gandolfi, Jake Heggie and David T. Little. 831-426-6966; www.cabrillomusic.org

Music Academy of the West Summer Festival, June 12-Aug. 5; Santa Barbara, Calif.: The seaside festival turns 70 with a packed schedule that includes orchestra, chamber and solo concerts, 10 premieres and a new piano competition. In his final appearance as music director of the resident New York Philharmonic, Alan Gilbert will conduct Beethoven's Ninth Symphony, an outdoor performance billed as the largest classical music event in local history. 805-969-8787; www.musicacademy.org

Music@Menlo Chamber Music Festival and Institute, July 14-Aug. 5; Atherton, Calif.: The theme of the 15th anniversary season is "The Glorious Violin," exploring the evolution of violin playing and composition and its impact on the musical landscape. Artistic directors David Finckel, cello, and Wu Han, piano, will oversee more than 50 events, including concerts by international artists and an institute for emerging professional chamber musicians. 650-331-0202; www.musicatmenlo.org