ES1Glenmore Reservoir

2018/2019 Fishing Regulations Disclaimer: Although we strive for accuracy in our content, the following rules and regulations should only be considered a reference. It is your responsibility to ensure you are in compliance with all current rules and regulations. We assume no responsibility or liability for any inaccurate, delayed or incomplete information. Official information can be found www.albertaregulations.ca or call Alberta Sustainable Resource Development information centre at (780)-944-0313. CLOSED November 1 -to- April 30 OPENED May 1 -to- October 31 BAIT Allowed (except bait fish) Fish Keep limit (size restrictions) Rules & Regulations are from Alberta Sustainable Resource Development Trout 5 - limit applies to All Trout species combined (except Bull Trout are Catch & Release ONLY) Brown Trout included in Trout limit & size restrictions listed above Rainbow Trout included in Trout limit & size restrictions listed above Mountain Whitefish 5 (all under 30cm must be released) Northern Pike 3 (no size restrictions) Yellow Perch 15 Advisories Fishing from the docks or ramps are not allowed. Related Waters The following waters are connected to this location. You should be familiar with them prior to entering the area, in the event that you are fishing bodies of water that have different rules than the current location. Elbow River - (from Hwy 22 downstream to Glenmore Reservoir & tributaries)

Elbow River - (from Glenmore Reservoir downstream to Bow River)

Location Map Use Google to find the best driving route by clicking here. NOTE: Some sections of rivers, streams and creeks have different rules for different parts of that water system. It is your responsibility to know where you are. AlbertaFishingGuide.com holds no responsibility or liability in any event of injury, death, loss of property or profits as a result of the use of this map. The information provided is intended for planning purposes only. Road conditions, safety and closure are not guaranteed. Use this information at your own risk.