President Donald Trump’s tweets accounted for plenty of news cycles. | Susan Walsh/AP Photo Trump After Dark: Back to the Future edition

Official Washington is in holiday mode — and President Donald Trump is soaking up rays in Florida.

So it’s a good time to look back at what Year One of a Trump presidency has meant.

Story Continued Below

POLITICO’s Annie Karni explores one unique feature of Trump’s presidency: The Twitter feud. Never before has a Commander in Chief taken the digitial bully pulpit to the levels of President Trump and the effects — on celebrities, a deputy FBI director and politicians among others — has been something to behold.

“The personal attacks from the leader of the free world, blasted out to his 45 million followers, have no real precedent in American politics. They’ve energized the president and his base, outraged his opponents and driven entire news cycles — but also shocked and traumatized those individuals on the receiving end.”

Trump’s tweets accounted for plenty of news cycles. But it’s hard to say what will drive to 2018.

There were plenty of bad predictions about what would happen in 2017. As POLITICO’s Zack Stanton and Derek Robertson explain , 2017 was many things — among them a year for generally pretty terrible political prognosticating.

The most reliable politics newsletter. Sign up for POLITICO Playbook and get the latest news, every morning — in your inbox. Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Among the worst? Trump resigning before year’s end; Jared Kushner exerting a moderating influence on the White House and one, from Trump himself, that his inauguration would be a record-breaker.

Elsewhere in President Trump’s orbit:

OBAMA WINS*: President Trump and President Barack Obama never ran against each other but the latter edged the former out in Gallup’s most admired man survey. Hillary Clinton topped the list of women.

OUT LIKE FLYNN: The Trump team’s plan is to paint Michael Flynn as a liar and dissembler should he turn on any of President Trump’s inner circle in the ongoing investigation of Russian election interference.

EMPTY CABINET: President Trump’s Cabinet has been executing his priorities largely in secret, often shielding their public schedules and other details from the press.

LVIV AND LET LVIV: Secretary of State Rex Tillerson asked Moscow to reduce the level of violence in eastern Ukraine, where Russian troops have been siding with separatists in skirmishes against the Ukrainian government.

CHARGES FILED: Joy Villa, the pro-Trump singer considering a congressional bid, filed sexual assault charges against former Trump campaign manager Corey Lewandowski after he reportedly slapped her butt hard, twice, after being told not to do so.

There you have it. You’re caught up on the Trump administration. Happy Wednesday.

