Thijs: the meta in tournaments is really open now Article: LiquidHearth



Thijs "ThijsNL" Molendijk



Team: Gamers2



Qualification: EU Champion

EU HWC Points Finish: Top 8



Run: 3-1 Greensheep

3-2 Xixo

3-1 Lifecoach

3-1 Maverick

3-1 Ostkaka

3-0 Lifecoach

3-1 Neirea



Decks used in Regional Qualifiers:

Druid, Handlock, Patron

Decks used in Regional Championship:

Druid, Handlock, Patron



Gamers2EU ChampionTop 83-1 Greensheep3-2 Xixo3-1 Lifecoach3-1 Maverick3-1 Ostkaka3-0 Lifecoach3-1 NeireaDruid,Handlock,WarriorDruid,Handlock,Warrior Interview

Hey Thijs, how's life?



Feeling pretty good!



Yea you should be. You've been doing pretty well lately in Hearthstone, European Champion, 2nd place at Starladder. To what do you attribute this success?



I have been working to improve myself from the start I played Hearthstone. It feels that it is paying off now and things are going my way too.



Your beginning of 2015 was relatively uneventful but you've been on an extremely hot streak lately, what changed? Have you been pushing yourself especially hard lately or is it just variance?



That's true. I had a rough start and it was hard on me. I'm sometimes too hard on myself and even when I win I look for something I could do better. I think it's a good mindset if you want to be or stay at the top.



You didn't answer the question...



Haha, ye mostly the pushing myself thing



It might also be some variance over the last two months where everything for some time comes together. There were no major changes recently but it was hard for me to make the change from Last Hero Standing to Conquest.



You mentioned in previous interviews that the Druid/Patron/Handlock metagame at the EU qualifiers was extremely favorable for you. Can you give your insights on what the metagame will be like at Blizzcon and whether it'll be equally as favorable?



Now with the Warsong Patron



I'm not as confident in the new meta. In the old meta all my favorite classes where top tier, that might have changed a bit now.



Patron "Druid was already strong and Paladin is probably the most consistent class overall withgone."



I want to talk a bit about your EU lineup. In particular, the tech changes you made to Handlock. You took out all copies of Shadowflame Darkbomb Shadowflame



When two good Handlock players face off, the one playing proactively has an edge, especially when your deck is teched with big swing cards (Owl/BGH). Cutting a Darkbomb Shadowflame Shadowflame Shadowflame Feeling pretty good!I have been working to improve myself from the start I played Hearthstone. It feels that it is paying off now and things are going my way too.That's true. I had a rough start and it was hard on me. I'm sometimes too hard on myself and even when I win I look for something I could do better. I think it's a good mindset if you want to be or stay at the top.Haha, ye mostly the pushing myself thingIt might also be some variance over the last two months where everything for some time comes together. There were no major changes recently but it was hard for me to make the change from Last Hero Standing to Conquest.Now with thebeing removed from the game, I expect many Paladins and Druids. Druid was already strong and Paladin is probably the most consistent class overall withgone. I think the meta in tournaments is really open now, I wouldn't be surprised to see almost all the classes.I'm not as confident in the new meta. In the old meta all my favorite classes where top tier, that might have changed a bit now.When two good Handlock players face off, the one playing proactively has an edge, especially when your deck is teched with big swing cards (Owl/BGH). Cutting a, Healbot andmakes sure you have no dead cards in the first eight turns. Yesis really good in the mirror but only when your opponent plays into it. The good thing about cutting these cards are that players will still play around them. Nobody expects a Handlock deck without





Speaking of the EU finals, can you rank the regions for me in terms of the strength of players who qualified?



Really hard for me to say since I don't know much about the players from SEA and China. I think we in EU have some really good players representing the region and the same goes for NA. SEA with Kranich and Pinpingho having some known players too. It will be a close call between regions, I believe in Europe!



"It will be a close call between regions, I believe in Europe!"



Well then who are some players you'd like to single out as your strongest competition?



Purpledrank, Hotform, Kranich, Lifecoach and Ostkaka are players I really respect.



I know your brother is also into Hearthstone. With your more recent success, do you think he's more considering following the same path?



He's is different than me, but I hope so. He loves Hearthstone and I even play with him to prepare for tournaments. He is really good. I will take him to future events for sure. If he can manage to find more time for Hearthstone, who knows.



Cool, that's all I have for you for now. Any final words?



Thanks to G2, my teammates and the fans cheering for me, it means a lot to me!



Other Interviews

Americas: JAB, Nias, Purple, Hotform Really hard for me to say since I don't know much about the players from SEA and China. I think we in EU have some really good players representing the region and the same goes for NA. SEA with Kranich and Pinpingho having some known players too. It will be a close call between regions, I believe in Europe!Purpledrank, Hotform, Kranich, Lifecoach and Ostkaka are players I really respect.He's is different than me, but I hope so. He loves Hearthstone and I even play with him to prepare for tournaments. He is really good. I will take him to future events for sure. If he can manage to find more time for Hearthstone, who knows.Thanks to G2, my teammates and the fans cheering for me, it means a lot to me!





Europe: Neirea, ThijsNL, Lifecoach, Ostkaka







China: Zoro, LoveCX, Zihao, NoTomorrow





Asia-Pacific: Pinpingho, Kno, Kranich, Neilyo





Asia-Pacific: Pinpingho, Kno, Kranich, Neilyo





Interviewer //

Photo //

Graphics //

Editor // // monk // Blizzard // shiroiusagi // Hayl