tennydr10confidential:

The way he smiles that it seems to brighten up your day.

The way he laughs in a way that is very contagious.

The way he cries so you want you to cry with him.

The way he does that cute little chipmunk giggle(if only gifs had sound)



The way he looks in glasses with them on and while taking them off.

The way he does that cute winky eye tongue thing that is just too cute and sexy for words.

The way he can laugh and joke about embarrassing things such as his face being on panties.

The way he gets frustrated after repeating himself over and over again.



The way he dances and isn’t afraid to be silly and foolish while doing so.

The way he is so humble and appreciative when receiving awards or other acknowledgements.

The way he pours his heart into helping others by working with various charities.

The way he licks his lip when he is listening or thinking about what to say.

The way his left eyebrow seems to raise up and have a mind of it’s own.

The way his cute little suck you in dimple shows sometimes when he sucks in cheeks.

The way he can be such a lovable obsessive geeky dork just like us and knows it.



The way he interacts with his fans to make sure they have special moment even it means ruffling his hair.

The way he gets all excited when he knows or remembers things all of a sudden.

The way that he still loves things like Doctor Who and fanboys over them.

The way he treats kids like they are his equals and no lesser than he is.

The way he does voice acting or recording and actually acts out what his character is doing.

The way he sings even when he just lip syncs is just purely mesmerizing.

The way he kisses gently and passionately, so you desire to be kissed by him.



The way he hugs with warmth and love, so you feel like your getting a hug from him too.

The way he can make you feel smart and special even through an educational app.

The way he shakes one’s hand. (this I know from actually meeting him, it’s really firm, but nice and inviting, can’t really explain it)

The way he acts all silly,cute, and childish sometimes, which is really really sweet.

The way he genuinely seems pleased when he has done something.



The way he tries to protect the feelings and the well-being of his friends and coworkers.



The way he says goodnight to make you feel all warm and fuzzy on the inside.

The way he expresses his love for playing or giving roles complex darker characters.



Finally the way he was he was genuinely shocked and surprised when he found out he won NTA Special Recognition Award.





I could make more ways as to why I love David Tennant because there are just so many, but I think this will suffice for now. I love this man from the bottom of my hearts. He is not only really handsome and a great actor, but he has good heart and a soul, and is the kindest most generous person you could ever hope to meet. He is wonderful and brilliant, and I am beyond proud to be a fan of his.

-tennydr10confidential aka Katie