We applaud women who are able to make it through school while raising a child, but at the same time there are not a lot of resources available for moms in this situation. All colleges don’t exactly offer day care. One mom who clearly had no other options decided to bring her child to class. And her teacher responded in the most amazing way.

According to EntertainmentWise, the following photo was snapped at a small college in Jerusalem:



It was shared on Imgur, and has been viewed over a million times in the last two days. The caption reads: “So one of the students came with her kid, because she didn’t have a babysitter. The kid starts to cry in the middle of the class, so his mom, all embarrassed gets up to leave, and the professor took the kid from her, calmed him and continued teaching.”



This is a professor who truly cares about the education of his students. Seriously. If only we could all behave that way to each other. Care for each other and treat each other with respect and kindness. That professor knows that the mother is doing everything she can to better her and her child’s future. I can’t even begin to imagine how much that probably meant to her – knowing that someone valued her education and supported her that much.

Wow. In the middle of his lecture, instead of defaulting to being confused and annoyed that a child was in his class, he helped. He helped. Is this image worthy of over a million views and probably a ton of shares? Yes. Why? Because we so crave compassion that when we see it — it’s almost like an image from a fairy tale. Comments on the photo prove just how much it touched some people — even on the notoriously snarky Imgur site:

Sure, you could argue that the student was being insensitive to her classmates, disruptive, and whatever other annoyed adjectives one could drum up. But instead, let’s turn our focus to a professor who proved that a simple gesture of kindness and compassion could really help one person — and really inspire millions of others. He could have told her to hurry up as she was gathering her child and her stuff. He could have rolled his eyes. He could have done nothing.

There are always opportunities to make someone feel seen — like they matter. Good for you, professor. This photo just made our morning.

Related post: Dropping Your Child Off At College