HOUSTON, TX - DECEMBER 01: Case Keenum #7 of Houston Texans looks to pass during the game against the New England Patriots at Reliant Stadium on December 1, 2013 in Houston, Texas. (Photo by Scott Halleran/Getty Images)





–

Case Keenum was the winning quarterback for the first time in his professional football career. He wasn’t speechless, but talking about it wasn’t easy.

“I can’t put words on it,” Keenum said about the win. “It’s very special.”

It wasn’t the most successful statistical performance of Keenum’s career by any means. He managed just 185 yards while throwing no touchdowns and one interception. He completed 20 of his 42 pass attempts finishing with a quarterback rating just over 50.

The stats weren’t as important as getting the win. Chris Myers knew Keenum was a key to the victory.

“Huge,” Myers said about Keenum’s performance. “We definitely missed him. To see him – what he went through up in St. Louis and coming here in a week, less than that, and be able to put the performance he did today speaks a lot about his character and his dedication.”

Myers said Keenum spent a lot of hours catching up on the offense this week.

“First one up here, last one to leave, the entire week,” said running back Arian Foster. He said most people don’t understand how difficult it is for a player to go from one offense to another in such a short amount of time. He said Keenum “studied his ass off” to get ready for this game.

According to Keenum the system started to come back to him as he immersed himself in it this past week. He praised the offensive line for their protection and the offensive game plan leading to his success.

“Every play we ran, I felt good about what was called,” Keenum said.

DeAndre Hopkins wasn’t surprised by the showing today from his quarterback.

“The guy’s going to give you all he has once he get out there on the field,” Hopkins said. “He’s not going to leave anything out there. It was no question about him going out and being to perform the task today.”

Owner Bob McNair called Keenum’s performance “fantastic” after the game.

Keenum is the epitome of the next man up attitude this team preaches said Kareem Jackson.

“Case stepped in and did a great job for us today,” said Jackson who had two interceptions. “He did everything that the coaches asked of him. He led us today.”

Now it will be up to Keenum to lead the Texans next week against the Jaguars, a must-win game for the Texans if they have designs on playing more than 16 games.

Follow Stoots on Twitter – @Cody_Stoots