According to multiple witnesses, as well as the victim of the ugly episode, the leading Democrat in the Senate, New York's own Chuck Schumer, lost it at a swanky Manhattan restaurant on Sunday after he learned that a well-connected woman had voted for Donald Trump. After making a scene inside by declaring "She voted for Trump!" Schumer allegedly followed the woman and her well-known Democrat husband outside, repeatedly screaming, "He's a liar!"

The alleged incident took place on Sunday night at Upper East Side restaurant Sette Mezzo, where according to witnesses who spoke with Page Six, Schumer was dining with friends when he encountered long-time Democrat Joseph A. Califano Jr., a member of the board of directors at CBS who "served as the United States Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare from 1977 to 1979, and he served as President Lyndon B. Johnson’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs from 1965 to 1969."

Califano was accompanied by his "wealthy and well-connected" wife, Hillary, who is the daughter of CBS founder William S. Paley. According to witnesses, Hillary and Joseph were sharing a "quiet dinner" until Schumer went off:

Onlookers said Schumer was incensed that Hilary — the daughter of William S. Paley, the founder and chairman of CBS — had voted for Trump, even though her husband, Joseph, is a well-known Democrat. One witness said of the restaurant rant, “They are a highly respected couple, and Schumer made a scene, yelling, ‘She voted for Trump!’ The Califanos left the restaurant, but Schumer followed them outside.” On the sidewalk, Schumer carried on with his fantastical filibuster: “ ‘How could you vote for Trump? He’s a liar!’ He kept repeating, ‘He’s a liar!’ ”

Page Six reached out to Hillary, who confirmed the story.

"Sen. Schumer was really rude," she said, adding, "He’s our senator, and I don’t really like him. Yes, I voted for Trump. Schumer joined us outside and he told me Trump was a liar. I should have told him that Hillary Clinton was a liar, but I was so surprised I didn’t say anything."

For those concerned about Schumer's impeccable reputation for equanimity and professional comportment, not to worry. Clearly, Schumer, like his fellow Democratic colleagues (including the fair and balanced Nancy Pelosi and Maxine Waters), is a victim of the "climate of hatred" promoted by Donald Trump. Meanwhile, if you see Schumer out and you happened to have voted for Trump, you might want to avoid mentioning that fact.