For a list of guests, performers, and attending professionals ordered by confirmation date, please click here.

A Jarrod Carl Alberich

Jarrod “The Yard Sale Artist” Alberich is the creator of the comic book, Hamilton vs. Burr: A Werewolf Tale. He is also a trading card artist for Marvel & Upper Deck. He’s currently working for White Rocket Books providing cover art for novels & inking the Cold Lightning comic book.

Kevin J. Anderson

Kevin J. Anderson has published 140 books, more than 50 of which have been national or international bestsellers. He has written numerous novels in the Star Wars, X-Files, and Dune universes, as well as a unique steampunk fantasy novel, Clockwork Angels.

>> >> Back to Top

B » Tom Bancroft

Tom Bancroft has 30 years of experience in the animation industry, much of which was for Walt Disney Feature Animation where he was an animator on shorts and feature films of which Beauty and the Beast, The Lion King, Aladdin, Pocahontas, Mulan, and Brother Bear were part of the list.

Drew A Blank

Drew Blank is an artist and writer known for the indie novel Memoirs of an Antihero and his children’s book Aldo Tanners! Where Are Your Manners?! Blank has also developed a huge following with his collection of fake album art, horror children’s art, adult coloring books, and enamel pins.

Patricia Briggs

Patricia is the bestselling author of the Mercy Thompson series and the Alpha and Omega series. She has published 26 books and has short stories in several anthologies, as well as a series of comic books and graphic novels based on both of her series.

Ed Brisson

Ed Brisson is a comic book writer who first started to garner attention with his self-published crime series Murder Book and the crime/time-travel thriller series Comeback. He’s written and co-created four other series published by Image: Sheltered, The Field, The Mantle and The Violent.

Jason Bulmahn

Jason Bulmahn is the Director of Game Design at Paizo Inc. He was the creator of the Pathfinder tabletop roleplaying game and the team leader behind the second edition. Over his 20-year career, Jason has written dozens of books and articles for Paizo, Wizards of the Coast, Modiphius, and more.

James Burns

James Burns is a graphic designer, illustrator, and comic artist. He creates autobiographical comics, notably his long-running Grumbles series. In 2002, he was diagnosed with a detached retina, which threatened his eyesight. After recovering, he wrote and drew his first comic book, Detached, about that experience.

Jim Butcher

Jim Butcher is the author of the Dresden Files, the Codex Alera, and a new steampunk series, the Cinder Spires. His resume includes a laundry list of skills which were useful a couple of centuries ago, and he plays guitar quite badly.

>> >> Back to Top

C Rachel Caine

Rachel Caine is the New York Times, USA Today, Amazon Charts, and #1 Wall Street Journal bestselling author of more than 50 novels, including the internationally bestselling Morganville Vampires, Stillhouse Lake, Weather Warden, and Great Library series. She's written in many genres and categories.

» Jack Campbell

Jack Campbell (John G. Hemry), a retired US Navy officer, writes the New York Times best-selling Lost Fleet series, Genesis Fleet series, Lost Stars series, and "steampunk meets high fantasy" Pillars of Reality series. His most recent books are Triumphant, Pirate Of The Prophecy, and the Corsair comic series.

Cecil Castellucci

Cecil Castellucci is an award-winning author of novels and comics for young people including Shade, The Changing Girl, Boy Proof, The Plain James, Soupy Leaves Home, Don't Cosplay with My Heart, and the New York Times bestselling Moving Target: A Princess Leia Adventure.

» Ray Chase

Ray Chase is a voice actor most known as Noctis (Final Fantasy XV). You may also know him from Kingdom Hearts (Master of Masters), One-Punch Man (Puri Puri Prisoner), My Hero Academia (David Shield), and Persona 5 (Subway Announcer). He’s also a founding member of Loud, Annoying, and Very Annoying.

Ciruelo

Fantasy artist Ciruelo was born in Argentina and has been living in Spain since 1987. He worked for publishing houses in Europe and in the United States illustrating book covers, prints, calendars and trading cards with dragons as the main subject. He is currently writing and illustrating his own books.

Sean Andrew Copeland

Sean Copeland is the Historian Supervisor of Creative Development at Blizzard Entertainment where he oversees its team of historians. This team enables developers to create with confidence for Blizzard’s blockbuster franchises including World of Warcraft, Overwatch, Hearthstone, StarCraft, Diablo, and Heroes of the Storm.

>> >> Back to Top

D » Robbie Daymond

Robbie Daymond is a voice-actor who has voiced characters such as: Spider-man/Peter Parker in Marvel’s Spider-man, Tuxedo Mask in Sailor Moon, Prompto in Final Fantasy XV, Akechi in Persona 5, Sorey in Tales of Zestiria, Mumen Rider in One Punch Man, and Raymond in OK-KO among others.

Keith R.A. DeCandido

Keith R.A. DeCandido has written an appalling amount of fiction, both in 30+ media tie-in universes from Alien to Zorro, and in worlds of his own creation in the fictional cities of Cliff's End and Super City and the somewhat real cities of New York and Key West.

Dan dos Santos

Well known for his colorful oil paintings, Dan dos Santos' work includes novels, comics, film, and video games. He has worked for clients such as Disney, Universal Studios, Activision, Boeing Aircraft, Scholastic Books, The Greenwich Workshop, Penguin Books, Random House, UpperDeck, Hasbro, DC Comics, and many more.

Margaret Downey-Schottmiller

Margaret Downey created a character known as The Friggatriskaidekaphobia Treatment Nurse in order to teach critical thinking skills every Friday-the-Thirteenth. Margaret Downey founded the Freethought Society (FS) and the Anti-Discrimination Support Network (ADSN) in 1993. In 1994 Margaret founded the Thomas Paine Memorial Committee.

>> >> Back to Top

E Gigi Edgley

Gigi Edgley is an internationally renowned actress. Edgley has starred in countless film and television series including Farscape, Jim Henson's Creature Shop Challenge, FX's Feud, USA’s The Starter Wife, Kringle Time, Enuattii, Diminuendo, SyFy’s Showdown at Area 51, Quantum Apocalypse, Peacekeeper Wars, Beastmaster, Lost World, Star Trek Continues, and Nexus.

» Larry Elmore

Larry Elmore is one of the world's leading fantasy artists. His works have graced the covers of National Lampoon, Heavy Metal, and Dragon magazine, among others. He is best known for his covers for the original Dragonlance novels. Elmore makes Dragon Con an annual event.

Joanna Estep

Joanna Estep is the critically acclaimed illustrator of such titles as The Fantastic Four (Marvel Comics), Bitch Planet (Image), Death Head (Dark Horse), and The Thrilling Adventure Hour (Boom!/Archaia). Her work has earned her the S.P.A.C.E. Prize, and nominations for Eisner and Harvey awards.

Kacey Ezell

Kacey Ezell is a USAF helicopter pilot who writes sci-fi/fantasy/alt history. She was a Dragon Award finalist in 2018, and her stories have twice been featured in Baen’s Year’s Best Mil/Adventure SF compilation. In 2018, her story won the 2018 Baen Reader’s Choice Award.

>> >> Back to Top

F Mike Faber

Mike Faber is the founder and CCO of the geeky and ever expanding ESO Network. He hosts The Earth Station One and Earth Station Who podcasts. He teaches and mentors new podcasters on starting and producing new projects. The ESO Network celebrates all things sci-fi, fantasy and much, much more.

Bill Fawcett

Bill Fawcett & Associates has packaged and edited over 400 Science Fiction novels, two Navy SEALs histories and other military titles. He co-authored Mycroft Holmes Mysteries and has written numerous non-fiction books, many on great mistakes in Hhistory. He was a founder of Mayfair Games and still designs board and computer games.

» Esther Friesner

Nebula Award winner Esther Friesner is the author of over 40 novels, 200 short stories, and has edited numerous anthologies. Her best known, most popular works are the Chicks in Chainmail series (Baen Books) and the Princesses of Myth series (YA historical from Random House.)

» Bryan Scott Fyffe

Bryan Fyffe is a commercial illustrator focused on works rich in color and steeped in dark atmosphere. His work has been featured in publications from Dark Horse Comics to the galleries of Disney. He lives and works in Kansas City.

>> >> Back to Top

G Gawki

Gawki is a bold illustrator of fantastical, surreal creatures and characters that spawn only from her brain soup. Ki is known for being in Spectrum 4 times, her interesting use of color, and for establishing the Drawtober art challenge with Vonnart where 2000 artists participated the first year.

Rick John Goldschmidt

Rick Goldschmidt has been the official Rankin/Bass Productions historian/biographer for over 30 years and has authored six books. He worked with producer Arthur Rankin, Jr. who produced Thundercats, Rudolph The Red-Nosed Reindeer, The Hobbit, and more! Rick appears around the country at conventions and has done award-winning panels.

>> >> Back to Top

H Scott Hanna

An Eisner Award-winning artist in the graphic novel industry, Scott Hanna has been drawing and inking comic books for over 30 years. His work has been published in over 1,000 comics and graphic novels, and he’s inked over 23,000 pages of comics art.

John G. Hartness

John G. Hartness is an author, publisher, and podcaster from Charlotte, NC. He is the author of multiple novel series, co-founder and publisher of Falstaff Books, and a member of the Authors & Dragons podcast. He spends far too much time and money playing Magic: the Gathering.

Bill Holbrook

Bill Holbrook is the creator of the daily comic strips On the Fastrack, Safe Havens, and Kevin & Kell. The later debuted in 1995 and is the longest continually-running webcomic on the Internet. In 2016 he was nominated by the National Cartoonists Society for Best Webcomic (Short form).

>> >> Back to Top

I Samantha Inoue-harte

Samantha Inoue-Harte is a 20 year veteran in the entertainment industry. She stars in the James Cameron/Robert Rodriguez Alita: Battle Angel movie, is a anime producer with two series on Netflix, and is most known as the voice of Chocobo from Final Fantasy Unlimited in her voice acting career.

>> >> Back to Top

K Bill Keel

Astronomer Bill Keel, author of The Sky at Einstein's Feet and The Road to Galaxy Formation, has appeared at Dragon Con since 2004. He hosts annual overnight Live Astronomy sessions and has spoken on cosmology, extrasolar planets, citizen discovery in astronomy, science in pop-culture universes, spy satellites, and astronomical tourism.

Alethea Kontis

Alethea Kontis is a voice actress and award-winning author of over 20 books. A former student of Jane Yolen, Andre Norton, and Orson Scott Card, Alethea is the host of Princess Alethea’s Traveling Sideshow at Dragon Con. She lives on the Space Coast of Florida with her teddy bear, Charlie.

>> >> Back to Top

L Greg Land

Greg Land has been a professional illustrator for 34 years, the past twenty- something as a comic book artist. Some past projects include The Uncanny X-Men, Iron Man, Mighty Avengers and The Ultimate Fantastic Four, The Uncanny X-Men, Monsters Unleashed, Sojurn, and Weapon X, among others.

>> >> Back to Top

M Jonathan Maberry

Jonathan Maberry is a New York Times bestselling author, 5-time Bram Stoker Award winner, and comic book writer. He writes the Joe Ledger thrillers, the Rot & Ruin series, the Nightsiders series, the Dead of Night series, as well as standalone novels in multiple genres.

Mari Mancusi

Mari Mancusi is a multiple Emmy award-winning TV producer and author of more than two dozen sci-fi/fantasy books for kids, teens, and adults including Gamer Girl, the Scorched series, The Blood Coven Vampires, and her newest series, The Camelot Code: The Once and Future Geek, published by Disney Books

» Brianne Marie

Brianna Marie is co-owner of the Dungeons and Randomness podcast, as well as co-host on many other podcasts such as Good Morning Theria and The Buffy Breakdown. For the past year she has been handcuffed to her desk writing the setting book for Theria with her partner Jason Massey.

Gail Z. Martin

Gail Z. Martin writes epic fantasy, urban fantasy and steampunk for Solaris Books, Orbit Books, and Falstaff Books. Series include Darkhurst, the Chronicles Of The Necromancer, the Fallen Kings Cycle, the Ascendant Kingdoms Saga, the Assassins of Landria, the Night Vigil, and Deadly Curiosities.

Lee Martindale

Lee Martindale is known for teaching writers’ workshops, editing the anthologies Such a Pretty Face and The Ladies Of Trade Town, and stories in anthologies edited by Marion Zimmer Bradley, Esther Friesner, Diana Paxson and more. Her short fiction currently appears in the collection Bard’s Road.

» Jason Massey

Jason Massey is professional Dungeon Master and a co-owner/host of the Dungeons and Randomness podcast. Since 2012, it has grown into a huge show and his full time profession. He has just finished writing a setting book for his campaign setting in Theria alongside his partner Brianna Marie.

Mika McKinnon

Mika McKinnon is a sci-fi scientist, disaster researcher, geophysicist, journalist, and irrepressibly enthusiastic about doom. Currently, she gleefully interjects truth for far stranger fiction for projects still within the veil of not-yet-aired secrecy and is a science communicator with work on BBC, New Scientist, io9, Gizmodo, Ars Technica, and others.

» Mike McKone

Mike McKone’s first published work was for DC Comics’ Justice League of America and Marvel Comics’ Punisher series. In the years since he has illustrated almost every major character for the big two publishers, including lengthy runs on Teen Titans, Amazing Spider-Man, and Fantastic Four

Mark Meer

Mark Meer stars as the voice of Commander Shepard, Blasto, Niftu Cal, the Vorcha, and more in Bioware's Mass Effect Trilogy. Other voice work includes the Baldur's Gate and Dragon Age series, Hinterland Studio's The Long Dark, 1980's horror homage Slayaway Camp, and Chapterhouse Studio's Captain Canuck animated series.

Sarah Milkovich

Dr. Sarah M. Milkovich is the Science Operations Team Chief for the Mars 2020 Rover at NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Sarah specializes in the science operations of robotic spacecraft, bridging the science and engineering teams. She has previously worked on Mars Phoenix, Cassini-Huygens, Mars Science Laboratory, and Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter.

» Max Mittelman

Max Mittelman has been entertaining audiences since high school, but you're likely most familiar with his work as the voice of Saitama (One-Punch Man), Ryuji Sakamoto (Persona 5), Plagg (Miraculous Ladybug), and King (Seven Deadly Sins). He also voices Harry Osborn (Disney XD's Marvel's Spider-Man) alongside best friend Robbie Daymond.

Rebecca Moesta

Rebecca Moesta has written novels in the Buffy the Vampire Slayer and Junior Jedi Knights series, and with husband Kevin J. Anderson, she wrote the Crystal Doors trilogy, fourteen Young Jedi Knights novels, six novelizations, lyrics for two rock CDs, graphic novels, and pop-up books.

Jorge Molina

Jorge Molina is a Mexican comic artist and illustrator. He has been working exclusively with Marvel for the past couple of years, drawing titles such as A- Force, Star Wars, X-Men Blue, and many more. He is the current artist for the latest spidey event, Spiddergedon.

James A. Moore

James A. Moore is the bestselling and award-winning author of over 40 novels, thrillers, dark fantasy and horror alike, including the critically acclaimed Fireworks, Under The Overtree, Blood Red, the Serenity Falls, and his most recent novels, The Tides of War series and Avengers: Infinity.

» Sabutai Musashi

Sabutai Musashi is the current Grandmaster of Ninkage ryu bujutsu; a Japanese martial arts system that includes empty-handed study such as Aikijutsu, weapons study, such as Kenjutsu and Iaijutsu, and internal arts. Grandmaster Musashi and his students have provided exciting demonstrations of Ninkage ryu at DragonCon since 2005.

>> >> Back to Top

N Bobby Nash

When not wandering around the con, star struck, award-winning author Bobby Nash writes novels, comic books, short stories, graphic novels, and more. Nash is a member of the International Association of Media Tie-in Writers and International Thriller Writers. 2019 will be his 31st Dragon Con.

Jai Nitz

Jai Nitz is a comic book writer of Latino descent who has worked for DC, Marvel, Dark Horse, Image, Disney, and other publishers. He co-created El Diablo with Phil Hester and he co-created Dream Thief with Greg Smallwood. El Diablo made his big screen debut in 2016's Suicide Squad.

Jody Lynn Nye

Jody Lynn Nye has written dozens of books and over 160 short stories, most of them with a humorous bent. Her latest books are Rhythm of the Imperium (Baen), Moon Tracks (with Travis S. Taylor, Baen), and Myth-Fits (Ace). She also teaches the annual Dragon Con Two-Day Writers Workshop.

>> >> Back to Top

P Dan Parent

Dan Parent is a comic book artist and writer best known for his work for Archie Comics. He has also written and/or illustrated for DC Comics, Marvel Comics, Felix the Cat Productions, Mattel, IDW, Boom, Valiant Comics, Chapterhouse comics, and Harpercollins to name a few.

Bob Pendarvis

Bob Pendarvis taught the very first comics and animation illustration classes at the Savannah College of Art and Design, going on to create the school's Sequential Art BFA and MFA programs. He is currently working on a series of art education graphic novels designed to inspire girls to be artists.

Diana Peterfreund

Diana Peterfreund is the author of over two dozen books for adults, teens, and children, including the Omega City series for kids, the Killer Unicorns series for teens, the upcoming Clue novels, and the critically acclaimed post-apocalyptic retelling of Jane Austen’s Persuasion: For Darkness Shows the Stars.

Van Allen Plexico

Van Allen Plexico is the multi-award-winning author of more than twenty novels including the Sentinels superhero novel series and the Shattering space opera series, plus the best-selling crime novel VEGAS HEI$T, and military SF such as ALPHA/OMEGA, and the Cold Lightning comic book series.

Tim Powers

Award-winning Tim Powers is the author of numerous novels including Hide Me Among the Graves, Three Days to Never, Declare, Anubis Gates, Last Call, and On Stranger Tides, which inspired the feature film Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides.

Cherie Priest

Cherie Priest is the author of two dozen books and novellas, most recently The Agony House, Family Plot, and the hit YA project I Am Princess X. She is perhaps best known for the steampunk pulp adventures of the Clockwork Century, beginning with Boneshaker.

>> >> Back to Top

R » Trina Ray

Trina Ray is an Investigation Scientist for the ice penetrating radar instrument on NASA’s newest flagship mission - Europa Clipper. She worked on the Cassini-Huygens Mission to Saturn (JPL/NASA) for over 20 years, specializing in Titan, and is an active public speaker, invited to give many talks around the nation.

Corinne Roberts

Corinne Roberts writes and illustrates the ongoing web comic series Out and About. She has written/illustrated Trip to Trekka and Imaginary Sea 1,2,3! Along with her books, she illustrated the web comic, Kitty Game and the card game, Unreal Estate. She is releasing/announcing two more comics in 2019.

>> >> Back to Top

S Noel Saabye

With 25 years in the animation industry, Noel Saabye has had the opportunity to work with some exciting companies that include Cartoon Network, Warner Bros., Disney, PBS, Mattel and Activision. Saabye continues to work as an animator and has his hands in several recent independent comic book titles.

Brandon Sanderson

Literary Guest of Honor Brandon Sanderson’s novels are the Mistborn books, The Stormlight Archive, which includes the Dragon Award winning Oathbringer, his most recent bestseller The Rithmatist, and Steelheart, among others. He completed the final volumes of Robert Jordan’s Wheel of Time series and is published in 35 languages.

Richard Saunders

Richard Saunders starred as the Skeptical Judge on the TV show The One: The Search for Australia's Most Gifted Psychic. He is the host of the weekly podcast The Skeptic Zone, in its 11th year. An origami expert and children’s author, CSI Fellow, and life member of Australian Skeptics.

Scott Sigler

#1 New York Times bestselling author Scott Sigler is the creator of 15 novels, six novellas, and dozens of short stories. He gives away his stories as weekly, serialized, audiobooks, with over 40 million episodes downloaded. Scott launched his career by releasing his novels as author-read podcasts.

Thomas E. Sniegoski

Thomas E. Sniegoski is a New York Times bestselling author of books for adults, children, and teens. He is also a comic book scripter who has worked for just about every major comic book publisher and is the author of the ground-breaking teen series The Fallen.

Anne Sowards

Anne Sowards is an executive editor at Penguin Random House. Some of the great authors she works with include New York Times bestsellers Jim Butcher, Patricia Briggs, Charlaine Harris, Ilona Andrews, Taylor Anderson, Anne Bishop, Rachel Caine, Jack Campbell, Karen Chance, and Stephen R. Donaldson.

Eric P. Spana

Eric Spana is a biology professor at Duke University specializing in genetics and molecular biology who explains the unusual and fantastic occurrences in science fiction, fantasy, and video games using the biological mechanisms already identified on Earth. Sometimes he has to point out the really, really bad science, too.

Michael Stackpole

Michael A. Stackpole is a New York Times bestselling author and award-winning novelist, graphic novelist, podcaster, game designer, computer game designer, and screenwriter. He has worked in the franchise worlds of Conan, Star Wars, BattleTech, ShadowRun, Dark Conspiracy, World of Warcraft, and Magic: The Gathering.

Kim Steadman

Kim Steadman is a system engineer at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Currently she is a Tactical Uplink Lead for the Curiosity Rover and a Science System Engineer for the Mars 2020 Rover. Her job is to enable science while keeping the rover safe and happy.

E.J. Stevens

E.J. Stevens is the bestselling, award-winning author of the Ivy Granger Psychic Detective urban fantasy series, the Spirit Guide young adult series, the Hunters' Guild urban fantasy series, and the Whitechapel Paranormal Society Victorian horror series. Her books are available worldwide in multiple languages.

S.M. Stirling

S.M. Stirling was born in France. His latest books are The Sea Peoples (October, 2017), Black Chamber (July 2018) and The Sky-Blue Wolves (October, 2018). His hobbies include history, anthropology, archaeology, and travel. He also pursued the martial arts, until knees.

>> >> Back to Top

T Jonathan Tarbox

Jake Tarbox spent most of his adult life in Japan, working as a media manager and television personality. After working at Coamix Inc. as senior editor of Raijin Comics, he took the position of Group Editor at DC Comics. He now runs Arashi Productions.

Roy Thomas

Roy Thomas is a legendary comic book writer and editor, who was Stan Lee's first successor as editor-in-chief of Marvel Comics. He is known for co-creating some of comics' greatest characters such as Wolverine, Carol Danvers, Morbius, the Vision, Iron Fist, and Ultron.

Jamie Tyndall

Jamie Tyndall is a penciler, inker, and colorist with over seven years of experience. Tyndall has worked for various publishers including Zenescope , IDW Entertainment, Valiant Entertainment, Lady Death, Contraband, Absolute Comics, and Stan Lee’s POW Entertainment. His newest project is White Widow under Absolute comics.

>> >> Back to Top

W Mark H Wandrey

Bestselling author of military sci-fi and zombie apocalypse, Mark Wandrey has been creating new worlds since he was old enough to hold a pen. Three time Dragon Award finalist as well as author of 16 novels and growing, he’s just getting started.

Jean Marie Ward

Jean Marie Ward writes fiction, nonfiction and everything in between. Her credits include a multi-award nominated novel, two popular art books and editing CrescentBlues.com. Her short stories have appeared in ASIMOV’s and numerous anthologies, and her video interviews are featured on BuzzyMag.com.

Chris Warner

H. C. Warner produced the first install for Dragon Con's Pop Art & Comic show at the Sheraton in 2007. Over the past 20 years, he owned and operated Alcove Gallery, producing monthly shows, designing and building installations in the heart of one of Atlanta’s most art-centric boroughs.

David Weber

David Weber has perpetrated over 60 solo and collaborative novels and an unconscionable number of anthologies upon an innocent and unsuspecting public. He is perhaps best known for his character Honor Harrington, whom he hopes never to meet in a dark alley.

David Thorn Wenzel

David Thorn Wenzel has been part of the fantasy movement since the 1970s. He has continued to work on fantasy projects in the children's book, trade book and graphic novel markets. Wenzel's better known books include The Hobbit graphic novel and the newly released Kingdom of the Dwarfs.

Michael Z. Williamson

Michael Z. Williamson is a multiple bestselling, award winning author and editor in science fiction and a #1 Amazon bestseller in political humor. An immigrant from the UK and Canada, he served 25 years in the US Army and USAF. Williamson also consults on TV and movie productions.

>> >> Back to Top

Y Chelsea Quinn Yarbro

In her 49-year-long career, Chelsea Quinn Yarbro has sold 97 books and 83 shorter works in many genres. She is best-known for her Saint-Germain series of historical horror stories. She writes in a number of genres and under five different pseudonyms.

>> >> Back to Top