During the month of July, the Last Word On Sports NFL department will determine which three players deserve to be considered the faces of each franchise. For this series, we will only consider active players. In this edition, the Tampa Bay Buccaneers are the focus.

Faces of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers

Gerald McCoy

Head coach Lovie Smith said Gerald McCoy is “the best at his position” and “the best player on our team.” Since being drafted as the third overall pick in 2010, McCoy has established himself as arguably the best defensive tackle in the NFL. After accumulating 154 tackles, 27 sacks, 13 passes defended, four forced fumbles and three Pro Bowls in five seasons, he has proven to be one of the most productive defenders in football. His attributes such as his speed, explosiveness, and burst at the snap have caused difficulties for offensive linemen attempting to contain him. With his teammates raving about his skillset, McCoy continues to impress both the Buccaneers organization and the entire league.

Along with improving his game everyday, McCoy is striving to be the leader of this team. Earlier last season, he said that he appreciated the praises of his teammates, but he doesn’t plan to slow down with his production. Considering he plays for a franchise loaded with all-time great defensive linemen such as Simeon Rice and Hall of Famers Lee Roy Selmon and Warren Sapp, McCoy wants to continue to set the standard at his position.

Lavonte David

Another stalwart on the Buccaneer defense is weakside linebacker Lavonte David. At age 25, David already has 430 tackles, 19 passes defensed, 10 sacks, six interceptions and six forced fumbles in three NFL seasons. Voted an All-Pro in 2013, he is gradually becoming one of the premier defenders in the game. Although he hasn’t received the level of recognition as Panthers linebacker Luke Kuechly–who plays in the same division–coaches and peers have recognized his superb play. As David’s teammate in 2013, All-Pro cornerback Darrelle Revis said that “if David was not a Pro Bowler, then something is wrong. The voting must be rigged.” Head coach Love Smith even compared David to Hall of Fame linebacker Derrick Brooks, another Tampa Bay legend. If both Lavonte David and Gerald McCoy can continue to dominate and lead their teammates, the league may see a new form of the 2002 Super Bowl Bucs defense.

Jameis Winston

Although he’s only a rookie, Jameis Winston may be the main driving force for Tampa’s success this season. Concluding a brief, yet illustrious career at Florida State University that featured a Heisman Trophy honor and a national championship, Winston will now be asked to lead an offense that has struggled mightily in the past two seasons after breaking franchise marks in 2012. Losing only one game as a collegiate starter in two years, Winston has proved he can make plays and lead his team on the field; his off-the-field antics, however, have caused analysts to question his character. Persuading the football world that he’s a changed man earlier this year, Winston will get his opportunity to display his abilities once September rolls around.

Main Photo: