Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, following the lead of President Trump, has now threatened recalcitrant Republicans who oppose health care legislation offered by the GOP to replace Obamacare.

Speaking to the Associated Press, McConnell warned, "I would hate to be a Republican whose vote prevented us from keeping the commitment we've made to the American people for almost 10 years now" to repeal and replace Obamacare. He added, "I think the American people would be deeply disappointed that we were prevented from keeping our commitment by Republicans who in the end, in effect, voted for the status quo." He said unctuously, "I'm optimistic that none of my members in the end want to be responsible for the status quo on Obamacare."

McConnell admitted that once the legislation passed in the House, the Senate would change the bill, as he doesn’t have the requisite votes to pass the bill as it stands.

McConnell cited Trump’s support for the GOP replacement bill, asserting, "The president has been very effective in helping in the House with the health care bill. And we intend, once it comes over from the House, to have the president weigh in with our folks as well."

My, how times have changed. Remember McConnell in 2011? Here’s how he sounded then while speaking of Obamacare: "The importance of a repeal vote becomes more evident every day. Americans view it as an important decision point – a marker that shows we're serious about a return to limited government. On that point, it should be clear where Republicans stand. Every one of us voted against the bill. Every one of us voted for repeal after that. And this week, every Republican reaffirmed his or her commitment to doing it again."

As late as 2014, when the GOP won back the Senate, McConnell stated, “We certainly will have a vote on proceeding to a bill to repeal Obamacare. … It was a very large issue in the campaign. We’re certainly gonna keep our commitment to the American people to make every effort we can to repeal it.” Then he backed off a little: “It is a statement to the obvious, however, that Obama — of Obamacare — is the president of the United States, so I don’t want people to have [unrealistic] expectations about what may actually become law with Obama — of Obamacare — in the White House. But we intend to keep our commitment to the American people.”

"I would hate to be a Republican whose vote prevented us from keeping the commitment we've made to the American people for almost 10 years now ..." Mitch McConnell

Some Republican senators who oppose the bill include Rand Paul of Kentucky and Mike Lee of Utah. Since the Senate is split 52-48, McConnell has to strong-arm senators for the bill to pass.