With the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio fast approaching, it is interesting to hear all of the news stories about the state of this Brazilian seaside city and its ability (or possible inability) to properly house such a large sporting event. From ethical concerns pertaining to personal safety in the city to health concerns to all the hubbub surrounding whether or not Russian Olympians will be allowed to participate due to a doping scandal, it really puts a dent on the Olympics this year, which should really be a time for people of the world to come together to participate, and more likely, if your like me, just observe some of the top athletic competitors around the world together in one central location.

For Plant-Smart Living, we have look at a number of vegan Olympians from the past, and I can’t help but avoid looking at this upcoming Olympic sporting event without thinking about the possibility of someone or some organization promoting a plant-based message. After all, it makes a lot of sense to me quite simply because of how it has positively impacted my own life; and based on the reactions from vegan performers, can be considered a perfect source of fuel.

This perspective is let down, then, when I see that Team USA is sponsored by Milk Life as a result of a five-year deal put to paper with the United States Olympic Committee which will cover the 2016 Olympic and Paralympic Games in Rio de Janeiro, Pyeongchang in 2018, and Tokyo in 2020.

Corporate sponsorship of the Olympics is not a new thing, and I certainly do not have any problems with this per say. After all, the Olympics are extremely expensive to put on for a city, so it only makes sense to try and make some money in the process.

A major reason why it is a coveted position to hold the Olympic Games is because of the recognition and notoriety that comes from having them in a given city, and the boost to the economy it can be expected to bring. Just having so many tourists from around the world engaging with the city by way of purchasing bus and cab fairs, food at local restaurants, etc. can help support a city that may be struggling financially otherwise, as is the case in Rio de Janeiro.

Not to mention, the advertising and brand awareness being a corporate sponsor of the Olympic Games can have a huge impact on getting a company’s message heard.

The problem with a sponsorship by Milk Life, for me, is that their values do not jive with a whole foods, plant-based diet. It has long pervaded thought in the United States that “milk is good for you,” however recent research is beginning to show that this may not be the case. The negative impact of dairy on your body and on the environment as a result of the processes required to generate enough milk to actively support the many consumers in the US (and around the world) is difficult to ignore. Even more important is how producing milk on this level is unhealthy and considered by many animal rights activists to be an inhumane treatment of cattle. Not to mention, it is grotesque to think how by consuming milk, you are consuming the fluid of another living being as a source of food.

By putting pen to paper and signing a contract with Milk Life, the United States Olympic Committee has made a decision that impacts all US athletes whether they are vegan, vegetarian, or otherwise. Given the minority status of vegans in the United States, it probably is not an issue that matters to the majority of people; and moreover is probably not even showing up on anyone’s radar as a potential problem.

The psychological impact is simple: it implies all US Olympic athletes consume milk, and neglects to consider those who adopt a dairy free, vegan lifestyle.

But the core issue runs deeper than just perception by the audience and my personal feelings on the matter.

The larger problem is that through this brand awareness, Milk Life will likely see an international boost in recognition. Do not be surprised if when you tune into the Summer Olympics on the TV that you see a banner ad for Milk Life at some point in the mix of corporate sponsors, or if you happen to be someone going to the physical location, to see these ads and product placements in person.

The result of this recognition, though, is a continuation of the vicious cycle of dairy milk production, inhumane treatment of animals, and the spread of the ‘milk ideology’ that suggests “milk is good for you” without quality scientific research - at least, scientific research not backed by paid off lobbyists and pro-dairy organizations.

What is Milk Life?

One of the most complex things to understand in all of this is what exactly Milk Life provides, or put another way, what their purpose is in the sea of milk-based organizations. Their website leaves a lot to be desired, and on the surface is not exactly representative of an organization I would expect to have enough funding to be a sponsor of a major sporting event like the Olympics.

It would appear that at most, Milk Life exists to provide education regarding dairy milk products as a method of spreading the desire for milk consumption.

What really gets my investigative wheels turning?

The simple, small font note at the bottom of their web page for The Great American Milk Drive (a charity drive oriented towards combating child hunger with milk): “Brought to you by America’s Milk Companies & Farm Families.”