Home

Ponytail Ponytail Narrow Results Ponytail is a human-grade horse grooming collection inspired by a passion for horses and an appreciation of timeless equestrian style. A line of products formulated with the highest quality of ingredients delivered in exquisite packaging. Ponytail’s unique formulations clean, soften, condition and shine; providing a range of products both horse and owner will love. Equestrians invest so much love in the care of their horses; they should have the choice to use only the most exceptional products for their equine grooming needs. Shine with Style! Ponytail is a participating sponsor of the Hollywood Charity Horse Show. 10% of Ponytail’s net proceeds will be donated.

Shipping to the 48 Contiguous U.S. states Method Under $75 Over $75 Details Low Weight Economy Shipping $4.95 FREE Order arrives 7-9 business days from shipment date depending on receipt location (in the 48 states and does not include oversized items). In stock orders typically ship within 24-48 hours of the order being placed. This option is only available on orders which weigh less than 0.9 lbs. Standard $7.95 FREE Order arrives 6-7 business days from shipment date depending on receipt location (in the 48 states and does not include oversized items). In stock orders typically ship within 24-48 hours of the order being placed. Guaranteed 3-business day $19.95 $12.00 Orders are prioritized to arrive within 3 business days if the order is placed by 1pm ET. Not available for shipments to P.O. Boxes. Guaranteed 2-business day $24.95 $17.00 Orders are prioritized to arrive within 2 business days if the order is placed by 1pm ET. Not available for shipments to P.O. Boxes. Guaranteed Next business day $34.95 $27.00 Orders are prioritized to arrive on the next business day if the order is placed by 1pm ET. Not available for shipments to P.O. Boxes. Guaranteed Next Day Saturday $49.95 $42.00 Orders are prioritized to arrive on Saturday if the order is placed by 1pm ET on Friday. Not available for shipments to P.O. Boxes. Over-sized Items: Free standard shipping to the contiguous 48 states, applies to items UPS deems “normal & customary” in size and weight. Large, bulky, or odd-shaped items may be subject to UPS Oversize/Overweight charges.



“Business days” = Monday – Friday



When calculating shipping time, please use the next business day to start the clock for all orders received AFTER 1p ET. Shipping to AK, HI, PR and VI Shipments to Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands ship via UPS® where service is available. Now offering 2 Business Day and Next Business Day shipping options. For questions please call or email us for a shipping quote. Ship Method Under $75 Over $75 Details Standard $24.95 $17.00 Order arrives 6-7 business days (Monday-Friday) from shipment date depending on receipt location. These orders typically ship within 24-48 hours of the order being placed. Guaranteed 2 Business Days $44.95 $37.00 Orders are prioritized to arrive within 2 business days (Monday-Friday) if the order is placed by 1pm ET. Not available for shipments to P.O. Boxes. Guaranteed Next Business Day $54.95 $47.00 Orders are prioritized to arrive on the next business day (Monday-Friday) if the order is placed by 1pm ET. Not available for shipments to P.O. Boxes.

Description Style Regular order of initials (example Emily Jane Smith = EJS) A, B, G Traditional monogram order of initials (example Emily Jane Smith = ESJ) C, DD, F, H, K, BB, CC, EE, FF, KK, LL First and Last Initial (example Emily Smith = ES) L, M, Y Single Initial (example Emily Smith = E) D, AA, J, GG, N, P, Q, V, X, W, Z Spelt out Name (example Emily Smith = Emily) E, R, S, T Please allow extra delivery time for monogrammed products.

The Easiest and Best Guarantee in The Business

Shop with 100% confidence at Dover Saddlery. If something doesn’t fit you or your horse, return your original purchase within a year, and we’ll make it right with a refund, exchange or replacement.



Our experience as riders and horse owners ourselves is that in most situations a year’s time is fair enough to evaluate proper fit and function. PLUS: For manufacturer’s defects, we’ll extend the manufacturer’s warranty to a maximum of 24 months, regardless of their individual policies. (AND: Manufacturer warranties longer than 24 months will be honored and supported by us as well up to the length of those warranties).



Exceptions: Safety items such as helmets and protective vests may only be returned within 30 days, with their original tags intact. Saddles and riding boots may be returned within the one year period, but are subject to a prorated refund based on usage. Used saddles may be returned for 30 days only. For everyone’s protection, treats and vet meds which have been opened are not returnable, and returned blankets must clean and free of debris. Click here for our full Return Policy.

Your e-gift card will be delivered via email within 24 hours regardless of shipping method selected. If your purchase contains other items, select the ship method you would like the remainder of your order to use and it will arrive in the identified time frame.

[] [] [] Ponytail Sub-sub-category B128 Ponytail Ponytail Ponytail

Production