You don't often see someone call out an injured fighter coming off a loss, but UFC welterweight Tyron Woodley believes a matchup with Matt Brown is exactly what the fans want.

"Granted it's one of the toughest fights, but it's a good match-up, people love [Brown], he was a fight away from a title shot, ranked fifth, and fans would flip," Woodley told MMA Fighting Tuesday. "I feel like he will bring the best out of me and test my limits. I respect him as a fighter and feel fighting him makes the most since for my career."

Brown, rehabbing the right hand he injured in a decision loss to Robbie Lawler at UFC on FOX 12, isn't so sure. If he had his way, he'd much rather be re-booked against former WEC champion Carlos Condit.

"I just went to the doctor this morning for my hand so it's going to be four weeks before I'm even cleared to spar, punch pads, do any hard core grappling," Brown told FOX Sports. "I can do some light drills and stuff but my hand is still messed up so between now and then is when I'm really going to decide what happens. I feel like it's fairly irrelevant at this point but I think Woodley or [Carlos] Condit it probably going to be along the same line I would think. Me and Condit were supposed to fight once before and I think that's the fight everyone wants to see. I think out styles, the way they match up, is probably the most interesting fight out there. I'm open to whatever."

Brown was set to face Condit last December at UFC on FOX 9, but was forced to withdraw after herniating two discs in his lower back the week of the fight. Condit was then booked against Woodley at UFC 171 in March, suffering a TKO loss after tearing both his ACL and meniscus.

"You never know how a fight's going to go, but I would anticipate not a f**kin' barnburner war," Brown said of a matchup with Woodley. "That's probably not what the fans would anticipate. Whether it is or not, god only knows. Condit is probably a f**kin' barnburner. I can't imagine it going any other way."

Brown isn't confident fans would buzz over the Woodley matchup, whereas a booking with Condit would create a frenzy.

"Strategy is whatever," said Brown. "I don't give a f**k. I don't see the fans anticipating a war [with Woodley]. I don't anticipate anything in a fight. A lot of them are probably going to expect [Woodley] to knock me out real quick or he's going to take me down, grind me out real quick, or that I'm going to slowly beat him up and that it'd be a good war. Those are three basic options for Woodley where I think Condit you have, most likely, no matter how this fight goes, we're f**king each other up. We're going to be bloody and beat up at the end."

5 MUST-READ STORIES

'In breach.' The UFC announced Tuesday that UFC President Dana White was found to be in breach of the promotion's regulatory protocol after he removed judge Howard Hughes from officiating at UFC Fight Night: Bisping vs. Le. White later apologized and said he was wrong. 'Hopefully it's the last time I'll ever do that.'

'It's pretty much life and death for me.' Chad Mendes talks head games with Jose Aldo, the rivalry between Team Alpha Male and Nova Uniao and more.

Wonderful. Phil Davis explains his approach to fighting Glover Teixeira, helping Daniel Cormier train for Jon Jones and his concerns over the judging in Brazil.

Numbers. Saturday's FOX Sports 1 event in Tulsa averaged 689,000 viewers, the third-lowest for a Saturday night Fight Night to date, while the debut episode of TUF Latin America peaked at 7.2 million viewers on Televisa.

Heading south. UFC announces a stacked card for their debut in Mexico on Nov. 15.

MEDIA STEW

UFC 177 embedded episode 2.

Jose Aldo shoves Chad Mendes at UFC 179 media day.

Fight Motion: Henderson vs. dos Anjos.

Dan Hardy previews UFC 177 and teaches you how to gamble like a degenerate.

Highlights from PANCRASE 260.

TTTHS.

Wow. Fighter wins a title fight by TKO after his opponent pukes in the cage. (Gross-ish)

Long watches.

UFC 180: Ticket On-Sale Press Conference

...

WEC Wrekcage: Faber vs. Pearson

TWEETS

Sounds good.

Shit got heated today. Can't wait to punch this dude right in his mouth. @torque1net @thememorytag... http://t.co/sDVsGCE9A8 — chad mendes (@chadmendes) August 26, 2014

Things got out of control at the @ufc 179 media day in brazil. Good thing I was there to keep the... http://t.co/fqStqa5Sq1 — Phil Davis (@PhilMrWonderful) August 26, 2014

Ready.

@DiegoSanchezUFC @ufc Melendez beat you, Gomi beat you, jury smashed you, pearson beat you.. Use your brains cells and you have a chance!! — STORMIN NORMAN PARKE (@norman_parke) August 26, 2014

Got a fight?

Finally the day I've been waiting for is here. Thank God — Anthony Johnson (@Anthony_Rumble) August 26, 2014

Get well soon.

Thanks for the support everyone. I'm sorry I won't be able to fight next week. I can't wait to be back to 100% and fight for you guys. — Andre Fili (@TouchyFili) August 27, 2014

This is how you escape throws ;) #judo

Cool.

The struggle.

Waiting for someone to call me out — Hector Lombard (@HectorLombard) August 27, 2014

@danawhite @ufc @seanshelby I'm confident I can beat any BW and FLYW. You signed guys who ducked me 4 times. Give me a chance too. — Leandro Higo (@LeandroHigoMMA) August 26, 2014

@danawhite @seanshelby I work hard every day. I'm ready to fight at any time. I beat @ufc veterans. I'll do anything to be a UFC fighter. — Leandro Higo (@LeandroHigoMMA) August 26, 2014

I have to laugh at the way my mother keeps referring to my time on TUF as when I was 'on my holidays'. It sure wasn't any holiday :) #tuf20 — Aisling Daly (@aisydaly) August 26, 2014

I was carded at a bar for trying to buy orange juice. :D lol RT @lastcall155 @holdsworth135 I was just denied kombucha for not having I.D. — Roxanne Modafferi (@Roxyfighter) August 26, 2014

Why?

FIGHT ANNOUNCEMENTS

Announced yesterday (Aug. 26 2014)

cancelled Akira Corassani vs. Chan Sung Jung at UFC Fight Night: Nelson vs. Story

Dustin Jacoby vs. Muhammed Lawal at Bellator 123

Jake Ellenberger vs. Kelvin Gastelum at UFC 180

Norman Parke vs. Diego Sanchez at UFC 180

Dennis Bermudez vs. Ricardo Lamas at UFC 180

Marcus Brimage vs. Erik Perez at UFC 180

Kailin Curran vs. Paige VanZant moved from UFC Fight Night: MacDonald vs. Saffiedine to UFC Fight Night: Austin

Joseph Benavidez vs. Dustin Ortiz at UFC Fight Night: Austin

Andre Fili out, Chas Skelly vs. Sean Soriano at UFC Fight Night: Mousasi vs. Souza

Found something you'd like to see in the Morning Report? Just hit me up on Twitter @SaintMMA and we'll include it in tomorrow's column.