What do women fantasize about sexually? Super Fella reveals the top ten female fantasies and unveils the straight fact. Sexual fantasies for women are actually quite similar to what men fantasize about!

The sweet damsels are more on the dreamy and romantic side of things, but they do have their own share of sexual fantasies for women.

And quite surprisingly, the top female fantasies are not very different from what men want in bed.

[Read: Top 10 sexual fantasies for men]

If men and women share similar interests in sexual fantasies, why do we really have to hide it and pretend like we’re all clean as a whistle.

After asking a lot of women, and of course, through my own personal experience, here are the top ten sexual fantasies for women.

The top ten female fantasies

Women may say what they want, but most women at least indulge in a few of these fantasies, if not all.

I’m really confused about a lesbian fantasy which many girls think is a hot one, but a few others were totally against it. But what the hell, I like it, so here goes the top fantasies for women.

#1 The rape fantasy

This might sound like something women aren’t really into. But many women do dream about getting molested by a man, or fantasize about a man walking in, carrying her onto a haystack and nailing her. Aww, come on, not literally! [Read: Date rape facts]

Women like dreaming about a man who rips their Versace overcoat, and her D&G tee, and her Victoria’s Secret lingerie and ravages her. But for all the men out there, don’t ever try doing this in reality, she’d snip your ding dong off before you can get past her Versace. But a woman wouldn’t really mind if her own man does that to her, of course, minus the ripping of her expensive clothes.

#2 Being a stripper

Which woman doesn’t want to be a stripper? Give her a few shots of Absolut, and she’d be all over the table, flinging clothes off one after the other. But most women don’t do that, even after they down an entire bottle. They’re just way too inhibitive.

So the next best thing, they dream about stripping for an audience. They especially love it when a man takes out a few notes and dangles them down her G-strings. Women do feel a tad awkward to talk about it with their man, but I really think they should. That would be two fantasies with one stone.

#3 Role reversals

Women wonder what it would be like to be in a man’s shoes. Or more precisely put, they wonder what it would be like to be in a man’s boxers. They dream about stories where they could wear his long trench coat and a cap with nothing inside and take the man in the front or back. [Read: Sexual roleplay tips]

The man’s obviously painfully playing the girl here in this female fantasy, and he may not really like this much unless he’s got some gay-like tendencies, or if he’s willing to walk around with a sore ass the next morning.

But what’s the one statement a couple who wants to make this female fantasy a reality has to use? ‘Medic! Lubes. We’re going to need a lot of lubes!’

#4 Group sex

This is a one of the bigger fantasies for women and men. Men love to dream about a good threesome when there’s a great looking exotic Asian or a Latina girl involved.

Surprisingly, women like to dream about the same thing too! But they don’t want an Asian or some far-fetched demigod (they might), they just want their man’s friend! Yep, most women would love to play the pony with their boyfriend’s or husband’s good friend. [Read: How to start swinging]

# 5 A gorgeous woman

Not all women accept this controversial fantasy for women. But many women secretly fantasize about having a physical affair with someone like Angelina Jolie or some other hot bombshell who always talks like she loves to have sex with women. Can you believe that?! Gasp!

Women fantasize about what it would be like to be with someone of the same sex, someone who knows just how she wants to be touched and what will make her orgasm. [Read: Girls kissing each other]

And just in case you haven’t thought about making love to Angelina, girlie, she’s stated that she finds a woman’s body to be the most attractive thing in the whole world (all men second that) and she loves to make out with women! Now, even if women haven’t given girl sex a thought, they might just change their mind.

#6 Exhibitionism

Many fantasies for women include showing off. A lot! They dream about walking down a beach and by the time they reach the waters, they’ve got almost all their clothes off. If not that, a woman fantasizes about having sex in public where people can see her performing her act. [Read: Public flashing girls confessions]

The closest thing that women do to get familiar with this female fantasy is flashing to unsuspecting loners walking along on a highway. Exhibitionism fantasies can be a great boost for sizzling sex, and can also have a woman talking about really, really dirty things in bed. Which does turn on both partners. Life is good! [Read: How to talk dirty in bed]

#7 Submissive mate

Women do like getting kinky once in a while. Men are usually the ones who are on top, but at times a woman fantasizes about a man doing more than just showing off his balancing act on top of her.

She fantasizes about being told what to do in bed. She wonders how it would feel to be called a slut or a whore in bed. It may even turn her on. Even though it sounds like a guy’s fantasy, what the woman does during this act is her fantasy. Some women say they would listen to their partner, while some girls said they would do the opposite of what their master orders and wait to be punished. Freaky lil’ minxes!

#8 Dominatrix

This is a role reversal of the submissive lover. Some women like to dominate men, instead of getting dominated all the time. They imagine what it could be like if they could indulge in all kinds of crazy acts with their men.

This includes tying him up and doing whatever she wishes to her man. Telling him to perform sexual acts on her as well as making him beg for what he wants, are just a few things that run along in a woman’s mind in this fantasy for women. And trust me, some acts are just way too crude to be put here. The least of it’s got something to do with peeing! Omigawd! [Read: Sexual fetishes]

#9 A stranger in the bedroom

Women may cringe when an unknown male touches them, but they do love it inside their head! The thought of meeting a stranger for one night of great sex, where she can do anything and everything she wants is just what can turn her on like a light bulb.

She could do whatever she wants, talk dirty, ask the guy to take her from the back, talk about another woman, whatever she wants. Many women want to talk about a lot of things in bed, but worry too much about what their man might think of their female fantasy. A meeting with a stranger, at least in her head takes away a lot of those inhibitions. [Read: How to start fantasizing about someone else with your lover]

#10 Come and get me, boys!

This fantasy is all about having several men touch a woman at the same time. She may even dream about being surrounded by several men kissing, touching and seducing her at the same time.

Every woman has her own favorite number in mind, varying from three to around ten men groping her! There’s something about just sitting back and being overwhelmed by sexual male attention that turns on women. Women don’t really dream of this all the time and hope it would come true someday, but they just can’t help but sit back and wonder, how it could feel like!

Of course, there are plenty more female fantasies and there are always unique fantasies for women that may turn some women on more than the others. But as long as you’re having fun and so is your man, go on and explore your mind.

[Read: 20 things about girls that turn a guy on sexually]

You may think your man doesn’t enjoy these female fantasies, but you’ll never know until you hint a few ideas to him. And in any case, the fantasies for women and men aren’t really very different, are they?