CLOSE Hall of Fame running back Marshall Faulk was among three NFL Network analysts suspended. USA TODAY Sports

Donovan McNabb currently works for ESPN. (Photo11: Ethan Miller, Getty Images for New Era)

Former NFL players Donovan McNabb and Eric Davis will not appear on ESPN as the company investigates allegations of sexually inappropriate behavior while they were at NFL Network.

"We are investigating, and McNabb and Davis will not appear on our networks as that investigation proceeds," ESPN vice president of communications Josh Krulewitz told USA TODAY Sports in a statement Tuesday morning.

McNabb co-hosts a show on ESPN Radio and also occasionally appears on First Take, while Davis co-hosts a show on ESPN Radio from Los Angeles.

McNabb and Davis are two of several players-turned-commentators named in a new filing in a lawsuit brought by a former wardrobe stylist at NFL Network, a group that also includes current employees Marshall Faulk, Heath Evans and Ike Taylor. The suit also names Warren Sapp and Eric Weinberger, a top executive at Bill Simmons’ media group.

MORE: NFL Network suspends Marshall Faulk, Ike Taylor and Heath Evans over sexual harassment allegations

MORE: After shocking loss, Patriots in search of answers heading into Pittsburgh

In the lawsuit, Jami Cantor, who worked at NFL Network for a decade, claims that McNabb made sexually inappropriate comments to her in text messages, asking repeatedly about a specific sex act.

Davis allegedly told Cantor, “You look like a woman who knows what to do in bed."

"Mr. Davis also asked Plaintiff to have rough sex with him, and said that he wanted to choke Plaintiff from behind until Plaintiff begged him to stop," the complaint alleges.

Evans, Faulk and Taylor have been suspended by NFL Network, while a spokesman for Simmons' The Ringer told USA TODAY Sports in a statement that Weinberger has been placed on leave pending an investigation.

Contributing: A.J. Perez

Contact Tom Schad at tschad@usatoday.com or on Twitter @Tom_Schad.

GALLERY: NFL Week 15 power rankings