doesn't seem to care that fighting might cost lives, it actually made things more exciting in his "game". After he worked with Fili-Second to rescue Zap, he grew even closer to the pink speed mare and wishes to stay beside her to make his game more thrilling.

is a flawed prototype of the other Power Ponies arsenal with a self-destruct mechanism that could destroy an entire city if overused.

He is an additional member of the Power Ponies Megaforce and the partner of Fili-Second (Pinkie Pie); Troteye (Cheese Sandwich).Troteye is Fili-Second's secret admirer. He is an agent sent by the S.H.I.E.L.D. (Strategic Homeland Intervention - Equestrian Logistics Division), along with Captain Coltimate (Flash Sentry), Steellion (Soarin'), Pony Torch (Spitfire), etc. to support the Power Ponies and Humdrum (Spike) in fighting the army of Highbreed invading Equestria. When Zap (Rainbow Dash) was foalnapped by the Highbreed, Troteye was sent to rescue her, but Fili-Second immediately became jealous of his swift and good archery and they both competed on who will rescue Zap first. But the competition did not turn out well. When Zap was on the verge of her demise, Troteye and Fili-Second worked together to stop the Highbreed and free Zap and they prevailed. From then on, Troteye became Fili-Second's partner.As a cunning and skilled archer, despite being a heroic pony, he is always looking for excitement to feel great amusement. Trot-eyeTroteye is a skilled and agile archer. With his trusted bow Bowless, he can be able to fire countless arrows of different shapes and kinds (fire arrows, ice arrows, arrows that shoot nets, arrow bombs, etc.). But sometimes, when there is a huge horde of his enemies, he relies on Fili-Second to fire all of his arrows within only a few seconds. Afterwards, she would return all of Troteye's arrows to him within only a few seconds.Even if Trot-eye's weapon Bowless is of great use for any battle, unfortunately, itTrent Mercer/Fernandez (White Dino Ranger) and Power Rangers Dino Thunder belong to © Saban Productions and DisneyMikoto Nakadai (AbareKiller) and Bakuryuu Sentai Abaranger belong to © Toei Ltd.Hawkeye belongs to © Cheese Sandwich and MLP:FiM belongs to ©