Howdy readers! Long time no see. First off, I’d like to apologize for having not made a new post in over a month. My wife recently gave birth to our first child – a boy – born on July 2nd. As I’m sure you can understand, all of my attention and time has been devoted to learning how to take care of the little guy since he arrived. It’s been a wild ride so far, and we’re only just getting started! Things are starting to calm down now though, and because of that I can finally return to Complete Keto to share more recipes with you.

We’re in the middle of summer right now (the temperature is a hot and humid 90 degrees in Minneapolis today), so I thought I would share one of my favorite summer recipes. When I think of summer food, I think of grilling. A few days ago, I decided to forgo steak and chicken and opted to grill up some pork chops instead. Pork chops are often cheaper than steak and can also offer a great fat content as well. As a note, I always prefer to grill bone-in pork chops. I find great joy in channeling my inner-caveman and chewing meat right off of the bone.

For a side dish, I went with one my favorite vegetables – brussels sprouts. But not just plain old boring brussels sprouts. After all, this is Keto food that we’re talking about here. No, I went with bacon brussels sprouts. I mean, what goes better with pork chops than bacon?

My dinner, prepared:

Let us waste no more time. Here’s the recipe.

What you’ll need:

2 pork chops (I prefer bone-in, but boneless chops work great as well)

1 bag of shredded brussels sprouts

4 slices of bacon

Salt & Pepper

Worcestershire sauce

Lemon juice (optional)

For the pork chops:

Step 1: Lay the pork chops down on a large plate and dash a couple of tablespoons of worcestershire sauce on them. Be sure to turn the chops over and dash the sauce on both sides. Let the sauce rest on the meat for 10-15 minutes. Then, sprinkle the pork chops with your desired amount of salt and pepper.

Step 2: Heat up your grill. Aim for medium/high heat. I heated to about 350 degrees F on my gas grill.

Step 3: Toss the pork chops on the grill. Cook on one side for roughly 5 minutes. Then, turn them over and cook on the other side for about 4 minutes. When grilling pork chops, be sure to cook them until the center is no longer pink. The center should be cooked to 145 degrees F (63 degrees C). I took mine off of the grill when they looked like this:

Look at those beautiful grill marks!

Step 4: Set the pork chops to the side for at least 5 minutes to let the juices redistribute while the meat cools.

For the Bacon Brussels Sprouts:

Step 1: Heat a large pan over medium heat.

Step 2: Slice the bacon strips into one-inch “bite size” pieces. Toss the bacon strips into the pan.

Step 3: Cook the bacon until it is lightly browned, about 3-4 minutes.

Step 4: Add the bag of shredded brussels sprouts to the pan. Stir the brussels sprouts with the bacon, allowing for the bacon grease to cover the sprouts:

Step 5: Cook the bacon and brussels sprouts together for another 3-4 minutes or until the bacon in the pan is crispy.

Step 6 (OPTIONAL): Squeeze a light amount of lemon juice over the pan. Sprinkle pepper if desired. The bacon will naturally add saltiness to the dish, but feel free to sprinkle additional salt if desired.

Enjoy!