Round 5 has just finished and with a quick turnaround before Round 6 (Deadline Apr 13 8:30pm EDT), here are the FMLS takeaways from all the matches over the past weekend!

Philadelphia Union (2) – (1) Orlando City SC

MOTM – Kaka ($10.8) 7pts

Although it wasn’t a double digit haul, Kaka’s 7 points with out a goal/assist is the type of performance you want in your squad as the goals/etc will come.

WATCHLIST – CJ Sapong ($8.1) 7pts

Sapong once again looked dangerous throughout after putting a goal in the net early on. Thats his 3rd on the year will look to continue his scoring ways against the struggling Sounders.

Montreal Impact (2) – (0) Columbus Crew SC

MOTM – Ignacio Piatti ($10.5) 7pts

Although it wasn’t a double digit haul, Piatti’s 7 points with out a goal/assist is the type of performance you want in your squad as the goals/etc will come.

WATCHLIST – Victor Cabrera ($7.3) 11pts

4 defensive bonus on top of a clean sheet, and all for $1.5 cheaper than Ciman? Aaaand a favorable schedule leading up to their DGW in Round 8? Better bring him in before his price gets too high!

New England Revolution (1) – (1) Toronto FC

MOTM – Sebastian Giovinvo ($11.9) 8pts

The Atomic Ant was once again on the scoresheet and somewhat justified his price tag? With multiple DGW forwards doing just as good or better than Gio, his place in many squads is in jeopardy.

WATCHLIST – Jozy Altidore ($9.5) 4pts

Jozy’s first start on the year and he’s back to assisting Giovinco. However, I’m still leery of the lingering hamstring injury and the next three matches being away from home certainly don’t help his cause either.

D.C. United (4) – (0) Vancouver Whitecaps

MOTM – Espindola ($10.1) 14pts, Saborio ($7.7) 11pts, Acosta ($8.8) 9pts

Espindola was fit enough to start the match while the other two, Saborio and Acosta, were able to do their damage in substitute appearances. Should all three begin to get starts, take note.

WATCHLIST – Tim Parker ($6.5) 1pt

With Pedro Morales out injured, Vancouver looked lackluster offensively. After letting in 4 goals against DC, I look for them to shore up their defense in the upcoming rounds.

New York Red Bulls (0) – (2) – Sporting Kansas City

MOTM – Dom Dwyer ($10.2) 10pts

Dwyer notched his 3rd goal, his 2nd assist of the season, and looks primed to produce well in the upcoming DGW with Feilhaber pulling the strings in the midfield.

WATCHLIST – Ike Opara (7.0) 5pts

Opara has fully recovered from his injury and racked up 5 points in 50 mins after being substituted for the injured Kevin Ellis. With Bester’s status still unknown, Opara could be a 180min def for SKC’s DGW.

FC Dallas (2) – (2) San Jose Earthquakes

MOTM – Quincy Amarikwa ($7.6) 10pts

#Quincytime is once again in effect with his 2 assists. His price tag and expected output make for a perfect match to free up cash for the upcoming DGW.

WATCHLIST – Mauro Diaz ($10.6) and Clarence Goodson ($7.6)

Each player again missed out through injury and are unsure if they’ll be back for the upcoming DGW. Refer to MLSFB or R/FantasyMLS for future updates!

Real Salt Lake (1) – (0) Colorado Rapids

MOTM – Joao Plata ($9.5) 10pts

Plata has been involved in nearly every goal that RSL has scored (7 out of 9). If not for upcoming DGW’s, he should be in every team.

WATCHLIST – Axel Sjoberg (5.5) 4pts

A Starting CB with his price-tag and a DGW in Round 6 makes Axel a perfect way to free up cash for other DGWers if needed.

Houston Dynamo (1) – (1) Seattle Sounders

MOTM – Giles Barnes ($8.6) 8pts

Barnes returned from the injury suffered in Round 2 and was immediately back on the score sheet with his looping chip off an Anibaba throw in.

WATCHLIST – Cristian Maidana ($9.1) 5pts

Maidana is another returnee from injury and although he didn’t light up the score sheet, look for him to do so as the attack gels once again.

New York City FC (0) – (0) Chicago Fire

MOTM – Matt Lampson ($4.7) 9pts

Lampson continues to show the form that supplanted what many thought was Sean Johnson’s stronghold on the goalkeeper position. A 3rd clean sheet in a row should have managers (myself included) thinking about starting him instead of leaving all those points on the bench!

WATCHLIST – David Villa ($11.1) 4 pts

Again Villa “blanked” but was unlucky to not have a goal or two. He was also one away from 3 extra bonus. Look for him to break through next week against Columbus.

Los Angeles Galaxy (1) – (1) Portland Timbers

MOTM – Fanendo Adi ($10.0) 7pts

Adi once again found the back of the net but we weren’t lucky enough to see a penalty call so we can figure out if he will give way to the almighty Valeri! Both Adi and Valeri are near essential for their upcoming DGW in Round 6.

WATCHLIST – Sebastian Lletget ($8.0) 6pts

Lletget didn’t get on the score sheet but he certainly passed the eye test so look for the attacking returns to start climbing once the Galaxy get their mojo back.

Share this: Tweet





Email

Print

