

Due to popular request from backers, we have added stretch goals! We will post them one by one; as soon as one goal is hit, we will reveal the next!



Note that these stretch goals will be added post-release, in a free patch.

$10,000 (REACHED!) - Arena Mode! Fight against incoming waves of randomized monsters , eventually leading to a slew of bosses . Items will be randomly distributed around the arena. Hitting certain rounds of the arena will also allow you to unlock a variety of content!

- Fight against incoming waves of , eventually leading to a . Items will be randomly distributed around the arena. Hitting certain rounds of the arena will also allow you to $15,000 (REACHED)- Game Mutators! By finding hidden mutators inside the game, you will unlock the option to customize the game as you see fit! Enable mutators like:

Double Spawn: While monsters will have 30% less health, they will now spawn twice as frequently. Monster Affinity: Only one kind of monster can spawn, randomly chosen at the beginning of every level. Top 1%: Every monster will spawn as an elite with elemental properties. Shell Shock: Dropping below 50% health replaces all your items with another item from the same tier. And many, many more!

By finding hidden mutators inside the game, you will unlock the option to customize the game as you see fit! Enable mutators like: $15,000+ At this point, we have jam-packed our game with as much content as possible. We promise to keep updating the game into the foreseeable future. Thank you very much guys; to think we ever hit $15,000!

Games with roguelike elements have recently had a large jump in popularity. However, most players find these games hard to get into: they are usually exceedingly complex in UI and game rules. Risk of Rain is an action platformer with roguelike elements aimed to revitalize the genre with stylized graphics and an intuitive gameplay scheme that teaches itself, rather than having to be taught.

The three main goals for our game are simple:

1. Design a game that is randomly generated every play-through, to keep replayability high and fresh.

2. Time = difficulty. The longer you play, the harder the game gets. Keeping a sense of urgency keeps the game exciting!

3. Be enjoyable, regardless of whether you win or lose. No more fussing with complex and non-intuitive gameplay patterns. Players should not blame the game for their loss!

Want to try the game NOW? Download the Demo for Risk of Rain, free!

"..feels polished and raw even in its current form, perfectly capable of drawing you back again and again." - Chris Priestman via IndieStatik

Features

Play as 10 different characters , from the Commando to the Miner to the Engineer.

, from the Commando to the Miner to the Engineer. Fight over 20 different enemies and over 10 bosses , randomly chosen by the game with random abilities and powers.

and , randomly chosen by the game with random abilities and powers. Acquire 100+ items through unique chests and shrines, all with their own risks and rewards.

through unique chests and shrines, all with their own Discover 13+ levels with different enemies, shrines, and chests on each one!

with different enemies, shrines, and chests on each one! Recruit the help of 10+ drones , from missile drones to healing drones!

, from missile drones to healing drones! Unlock the lore of the game through the item and monster log!

through the item and monster log! Get new items and characters through achievements

Save your best highscores!

As I'm sure most of you know, college students aren't known for their large amounts of pocket change. While we have gone this far on a personal fund of $100.00, we simply aren't talented enough to make our own music! When we contacted the very talented Chris Christodoulou and he wanted to be on the project, we knew that we had to have him!. In general, your pledge money will go towards:

Paying for music . With quite a few different stages planned, we will need lots of unique music to fit the quality of our game.

. With quite a few different stages planned, we will need lots of unique music to fit the quality of our game. Upgrading GameMaker . While we have gone off an older version, purchasing either GM Studio or GM 8.1 will allow us to not only have increased performance, but possibly Mac, Linux, and other platform support as well!

. While we have gone off an older version, purchasing either GM Studio or GM 8.1 will allow us to not only have increased performance, but Quality assurance! Any left over money will be spent on improving and refining the game to be as good as possible.

We have two members on the team; Duncan is the programmer and artist while Paul handles public relations and helps with game design. Both attend University of Washington! Helping us with music is Chris.



The game began as sketches on the back of scrap paper. As we kept brainstorming, the game we were talking about sounded.. fun! We have been working on Risk of Rain for about 5 months, and the feedback we have received so far is incredible. Having never released any games to the public, it's exciting to see that we can make something that many people enjoy.

Thanks to many of our fans, we now have a working demo version of Risk of Rain, free to download. For those who want to see the game in action, the demo is for you!

While the demo has quite a few features, the final game will have a lot more for the player! In short,

More items! While the demo has only 13 items, the final release will have over 100!

While the demo has only 13 items, the final release will have More classes! The final game is planned on having 10 playable classes.

The final game is planned on having 10 playable classes. Monster Log and Highscores. The monster log is a bestiary where you can learn about the stats of monsters and their lore and history in the universe. Highscores allow you to compete with friends and yourself, along with seeing which achievements you have to unlock!

The monster log is a bestiary where you can learn about the stats of monsters and their lore and history in the universe. Highscores allow you to compete with friends and yourself, along with seeing which achievements you have to unlock! More stages! The full game will feature a variety of different stages for the game to choose from, making each run different and exciting.

The full game will feature a variety of different stages for the game to choose from, making each run different and exciting. More gamemodes! While the final game will have an ending, modes like survival mode are in the works.

While the final game will have an ending, modes like survival mode are in the works. Generally speaking, more content.

Fans who pledge $25 or more will gain access to the closed beta. Being in the closed beta will allow you to play the game while it's in development. This also gives you the opportunity to help shape and give valuable feedback. Not only that, but you get to play with new content before everyone else!

The closed beta will start as soon as possible, with the latest being at the end of our 30 day Kickstarter. Please remember that PC is the only platform supported for the closed beta!

Want to stay up-to-date with all Risk of Rain News?

Thank you to all of the fans who have followed us in development so far. Your feedback on the alpha versions of the game were priceless, and your praise kept us going. It's amazing that we have a fanbase of people who enjoy our hobby; gamemaking. We truly hope that we can meet and surpass all of your expectations, regardless of the pledge amount. Thank you to all our fans on AGDG, tumblr, indiedb, and everywhere else. Thank you so much.