Jim Jarmusch fans rejoice, as the hipster indie filmmaker is back after a five-year hiatus from the big screen with "Only Lovers Left Alive," a vampire movie starring Loki, Alice in Wonderland and what might very well be Tilda Swinton playing herself.

This exclusive new trailer introduces us to Adam ("Thor" star and internet sensation Tom Hiddleston), a reclusive musician living in a run-down house in Detroit. Like Loki, Adam is pale with long black hair and an even longer lifespan. But the vampire has grown bored with his eternal life and pessimistic about the future.

Adam's life (undeath?) takes a sudden turn when he's reunited with his longtime off-and-on lover, Eve (Swinton), and her wild card sister, Ava (Mia Wasikowska), paying a visit. They implement various schemes necessary for survival in a world in which humans have managed to taint their own blood, a sad state of affairs that requires working with a shady doctor (Jeffrey Wright) to get the supply they need to hang out for another millennium or two.

Tom Hiddleston in 'Only Lovers Left Alive' (Gordon A. Timpen/Sony Pictures Classics) More

It sounds like mopey melodrama, but the trailer showcases Jarmusch's wry humor, from Adam's disguises as he infiltrates a hospital (he has a nametag that reads "Dr. Faust" and later "Dr. Caligari") to Jarmusch regular John Hurt as the immortal Elizabethan playwright Christopher Marlowe himself, musing as to how he wished he'd met Adam "before I wrote 'Hamlet.'"

"Only Lovers Left Alive" is Jarmusch's first feature film since "The Limits of Control" (2009), a stark and spare exercise in mood and form that divided even the most dedicated Jarmusch fans. "Only Lovers" looks to be more of a companion piece to "Ghost Dog: The Way of the Samurai" (1999) with its out-of-time characters negotiating a fringe existence parallel to the modern world and all of its corruption and limitations ... and looking really cool with their sunglasses and chic wardrobes while doing so.

Tilda Swinton and Tom Hiddleston in 'Only Lovers Left Alive' (Gordon A. Timpen/Sony Pictures Classics) More

Speaking of fringe, "Only Lovers" has been lurking around the film festival circuit for almost a year, making its debut at Cannes last May and following up with screenings at last fall's Toronto International Film Festival and the New York Film Festival, among several others. Critics have been digging it as it currently holds an 84% rating on Rotten Tomatoes, with Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter claiming it's Jarmusch's "best work in many years, probably since 1995's 'Dead Man'" and Jordan Hoffman of Film.com heralding it as "the next great midnight classic."

"Only Lovers Left Alive" hits theaters on April 11.