Jones has been retweeting her harassers, but Twitter doesn't seem to be doing anything about it.

Despite the public’s largely positive response to Ghostbusters, it seems as though some bearded internet trolls still want to make their distaste for the all-female reboot heard. One of the main targets has been Leslie Jones, the only woman of colour in the main cast, and this abuse has taken a very racist turn. For the last 24 hours, Jones has been tweeting a fraction of the racist bullshit she has been sent in the last week.

I just don’t understand pic.twitter.com/N9xWoXPttu — Leslie Jones (@Lesdoggg) July 18, 2016

Exposing I hope y’all go after them like they going after me pic.twitter.com/ojK5FdIA0H — Leslie Jones (@Lesdoggg) July 18, 2016

Yep so sad these people have mothers and sisters and aunts. So fucking sickening pic.twitter.com/fEVLEgUfGh — Leslie Jones (@Lesdoggg) July 18, 2016

Ok I have been called Apes, sent pics of their asses,even got a pic with semen on my face. I’m tryin to figure out what human means. I’m out — Leslie Jones (@Lesdoggg) July 18, 2016

Twitter I understand you got free speech I get it. But there has to be some guidelines when you let spread like that. You can see on the — Leslie Jones (@Lesdoggg) July 19, 2016

Profiles that some of these people are crazy sick. It’s not enough to freeze Acct. They should be reported. — Leslie Jones (@Lesdoggg) July 19, 2016

I don’t know how to feel. I’m numb. Actually numb. I see the words and pics and videos. Videos y’all. Meaning people took time to sprew hate — Leslie Jones (@Lesdoggg) July 19, 2016

So far, Twitter has done nothing (apparently social media platforms only react to abuse when its against white millionaires) and so fans have taken it into their own hands. Today many users are pushing the hashtag #LoveForLeslieJ to outnumber the racist trolls that are filling up her mentions. Ghostbusters director Paul Feig, has also tweeted his support.

Leslie Jones is one of the greatest people I know. Any personal attacks against her are attacks against us all. #LoveForLeslieJ @Lesdoggg — Paul Feig (@paulfeig) July 18, 2016

Stand with @Lesdoggg #loveforlesliej she is an inspiration and a legend in the making pic.twitter.com/dqotlPAETd — Margaret Cho (@margaretcho) July 18, 2016

I am proud of @Lesdoggg for being an inspiration to little black girls the same way she was inspired by those before her. #LoveforLeslieJ — T’Challa Back Girl (@MarissaRei1) July 18, 2016

You can see how much representation matters by how angry it makes the people who don’t want to see you represented. #LoveforLeslieJ — @red3blog (@red3blog) July 19, 2016

HI THERE @Lesdoggg is the epitome of talent and badassery. She makes me want to work hard so I can be as good at my own job. #LoveForLeslieJ — Anne T. Donahue (@annetdonahue) July 19, 2016

If you need a break from the relentless hate for a second, please enjoy this nice video of Leslie Jones crying when she meets Whoopi Goldberg, and remember that representation is important and internet bigots cannot take that away.