Typical of the left: “Antifa,” ironically enough, stands for anti-fascist. But their violence and thuggery define fascism. Now we find that these brownshirts are openly defending this racist and supremacist pro-rape Muslim leader. Where is the SPLC to declare them a “hate group”?

Previously at The Geller Report: ‘Australian women need Muslim men to fertilize them,’ says halal food chief in Facebook rant

“With friends like these … Left-wing extremist group DEFENDS halal boss’ claims Australian women need Muslim men to fertilise them – calling critics ‘racist,'” by Stephen Johnson, Daily Mail Australia, July 31, 2017 (thanks to The Religion of Peace):

A violent, left-wing extremist group has defended a leading Islamic businessman’s claim Australian women need Muslim men to fertilise them, calling his critics ‘bigots’ and ‘racists’. Halal Certification Authority president Mohamed Elmouelhy told his Facebook followers Australia’s white race would die out within 40 years. He added that with Australian men a ‘dying breed’, local women needed Muslim men to ‘fertilise them’ and ‘keep them surrounded by Muslim babies’. Despite the outcry on social media last week, left-wing extremist group Antifa has described Mr Elmouelhy’s critics as ‘bigots’, even though he had called for ‘bigots’ to commit suicide. ‘Racists attacking Mohamed Elmouelhy – more Muslim babies is a good thing. Bigots,’ it said on Facebook. This is the same group which claimed responsibility in June for spraying conservative Sky News commentator Andrew Bolt with glitter at a book launch in Melbourne. Less than eight weeks later, they are weighing into more controversy by defending Mr Elmouelhy, who was commenting on Hebrew University in Jerusalem publishing research which showed sperm counts in men from Australia, New Zealand, North America and Europe had declined by more than 50 per cent in less than 40 years. ‘Your men are a dying breed, Australian women need us to fertilise them and keep them surrounded by Muslim babies while beer swilling, cigarette smoking, drug injecting can only dream of what Muslim men are capable of,’ he said. ‘Muslims have a duty to make your women happy.’ Mr Elmouelhy, who is the president of Halal Certification Authority, said Australia’s white race ‘will be extinct in another 40 years’ if the country is ‘left to bigots’. …

The Truth Must be Told Your contribution supports independent journalism Please take a moment to consider this. Now, more than ever, people are reading Geller Report for news they won't get anywhere else. But advertising revenues have all but disappeared. Google Adsense is the online advertising monopoly and they have banned us. Social media giants like Facebook and Twitter have blocked and shadow-banned our accounts. But we won't put up a paywall. Because never has the free world needed independent journalism more. Everyone who reads our reporting knows the Geller Report covers the news the media won't. We cannot do our ground-breaking report without your support. We must continue to report on the global jihad and the left's war on freedom. Our readers’ contributions make that possible. Geller Report's independent, investigative journalism takes a lot of time, money and hard work to produce. But we do it because we believe our work is critical in the fight for freedom and because it is your fight, too. Please contribute to our ground-breaking work here.

Make a monthly commitment to support The Geller Report – choose the option that suits you best. Contribute Monthly - Choose One Subscriber : $18.00 USD - monthly Contributor : $36.00 USD - monthly Patron : $50.00 USD - monthly Silver member : $100.00 USD - monthly Gold member : $250.00 USD - monthly Platinum member : $500.00 USD - monthly