Auburn Week 14 2013-Auburn vs. Alabama Game Day

ESPN analysts Lee Corso, left, and Kirk Herbstreit Saturday, Nov. 30, 2013, on the set of ESPN College Game Day outside Jordan-Hare Stadium in Auburn, Ala. (Julie Bennett/jbennett@al.com)

(JULIE BENNETT)

Kirk Herbstreit is going against the grain.

Despite Auburn coming off a disappointing 7-6 season, an uncertain quarterback picture and the dismissal of running back Jovon Robinson, the ESPN college football analyst picked Auburn as his sleeper in the SEC and No. 4 among his surprise teams this season.

UPDATED: Herbstreit clarified that he was not implying Auburn would actually win the SEC -- he picked Alabama to beat Tennessee -- but was picking the Tigers to be in a "sleeper" in a more general sense.

Herbstreit explained why he's optimistic about Auburn, which is unranked in both the preseason AP and coaches polls, compared to other media members, including those in the SEC media, which picked the Tigers to finish sixth in the SEC West during SEC Media Days.

"I think if you look at (Auburn being 6-10 in SEC play the last two years) and you look at the roster and you look who they have at quarterback, I can see why the media said that this team's not going to compete," Herbstreit said on a conference call Wednesday. "Even in the backfield with the tailback situation. For me it's more of I think the defense is going to be really, really good. I think they're going to play with a chip on their shoulder. I think they're going to be mad at the world when they play this year.

"I think defensively they're going to stay in almost every game that they play and then it's just a matter of the head coach, Gus Malzahn, and the offense finding ways to put enough points up on the board to win."

Auburn is 2-9 in its last 11 SEC games and has not beaten a conference foe at Jordan-Hare Stadium since defeating South Carolina, 42-35, on Oct. 25, 2014.

The Tigers open the 2016 season with five straight home games starting on Sept. 3 against No. 2 Clemson.

Malzahn and Auburn's defensive players are extremely optimistic about what that side of the ball will deliver this fall. Herbstreit is too.

"I would be careful just by looking at 8-5 two years ago, 7-6 last year, 6-10 in conference play over the last couple of years, I think it's easy to look at this and say that this thing's heading in the wrong direction," Herbstreit said. "I just think there's a little bit more backbone to the program than maybe all of us realize on the outside. I think it'll be led this year by the defense. I think the defense is going to be one of the best in the SEC."