Yum



Here’s a delicious chocolate and coconut truffle recipe. These treats are not only decadent and easy to make, but they are also suitable for a raw, vegan, gluten-free or paleo diet.

You probably already know that chocolate and coconut is one of my favorite combinations. This is optional, but I added some hazelnuts to the truffle mixture, and I think that they make the taste of the truffles special and indulgent. However, you can replace hazelnuts with any nuts or seeds you like, or you can just skip this step.

Lastly, if you don’t have coconut cream or full-fat coconut milk at hand, you can use a little bit of plant-based milk and some more coconut oil to get the right consistency.

Other dessert recipes you may like

Ingredients

4 tablespoons coconut cream (from a can of refrigerated coconut milk)

(from a can of refrigerated coconut milk) 1 tablespoon coconut oil

1 1/4 cup of desiccated coconut (1 cup for the mixture and ¼ for rolling the truffles)

4 tablespoons cocoa or cacao powder

3-4 tablespoons of maple syrup

¼ cup of hazelnuts

Instructions

Grind the hazelnuts in a blender or food processor. Add the rest of the ingredients and process until you have a homogeneous mixture. If the mixture feels too soft, put it in the fridge for 10-15 minutes.

Shape balls out of the mixture and roll them into desiccated coconut.

Keep the truffles in the fridge. They’ll need a few hours to harden up.

Enjoy! 🙂

Print Delicious Chocolate and Coconut Truffles Yield: 15 Ingredients 4 tablespoons coconut cream (from a can of refrigerated coconut milk)

1 tablespoon coconut oil

1 1/4 cup of desiccated coconut (1 cup for the mixture and ¼ for rolling the truffles)

4 tablespoons cocoa or cacao powder

3-4 tablespoons of maple syrup

¼ cup of hazelnuts Instructions Grind the hazelnuts in a blender or food processor. Add the rest of the ingredients and process until you have a homogeneous mixture. If the mixture feels too soft, put it in the fridge for 10-15 minutes. Shape balls out of the mixture and roll them into desiccated coconut. Keep the truffles in the fridge. They’ll need a few hours to harden up. 5.0 https://www.myhealthydessert.com/recipes/chocolate-coconut-truffles/ © MyHealthyDessert

If you like the recipe, share it with your friends and if you try making these vegan truffles, please let me know how they turned out for you!

Don’t forget to follow me on Facebook and Twitter to know when a new recipe is up. ?