Spin Class Remixes to Pay tribute to Our Beloved Musicians who died in 2016

Indoor Cycling without music?

Impossible.

These artist are our heart beat. The literal soul of the class. They reach out and touch Riders in diverse, indelible ways. This year we lost so many! These larger-than-life rockers, pop stars -poets! Without them we are nothing. So I feel it fitting to pay a little tribute to some of them.

I am sure I missed many! I started to make a one our playlist and when I looked up I had 90 min. So you have lots to choose from to make your theme class. The first 60 min is mine... the last 30 min in the playlist is a bonus... for those extra long classes!

So Here we go down Memory lane one last time! All of the following remixes are from the originals that were made, produced or written by: David Bowie, Glenn Frey (Eagles), Maurice White (Earth, Wind & Fire), George Martin (Beatles), Merle Haggard, Prince, Thomas Fekete (Surfers Blood), Christina Grimme, Pete Burns (Dead or Alive), Bobby Vee, Leonard Cohen, Muhammad Ali and George Michael.

​Muhammad Ali MY HERO - The Greatest

The first song on the playlist is a little warmup I like. It was a tribute made by RTE. It's personal. Its Ali. In terms of a playlist I like to build in the odd motivational speech ... and I think this man had someting to say. Enjoy him in his own words:

"Last night I had a dream,

When I got to Africa,

I had one hell of a rumble.

I had to beat Tarzan’s behind first,

For claiming to be King of the Jungle.

For this fight, I’ve wrestled with alligators,

I’ve tussled with a whale.

I done handcuffed lightning

And throw thunder in jail.

You know I’m bad.just last week, I murdered a rock,

Injured a stone, Hospitalized a brick.

I’m so mean, I make medicine sick.

I’m so fast, man,I can run through a hurricane and don't get wet.

When George Foreman meets me,He’ll pay his debt.I can drown the drink of water, and kill a dead tree.

Wait till you see Muhammad Ali."

​

INDOOR CYCLING MUSIC ESSENTIALs: “ARTISTS WE’VE LOST IN 2016 TRIBUTE MIX”

​