Gov. Scott Walker is asking for donations to pay off his campaign debt. Credit: Associated Press

By of the

Facing an estimated $1 million in debt from his failed presidential campaign, Gov. Scott Walker is now soliciting donations to pay it off.

"As things changed dramatically in the presidential race, 'Walker for America' incurred a campaign debt and it is my hope that you and all of our supporters will chip in and make an online contribution of $10, $35, $50, $100, $250, or more so we can end this campaign in the black," Walker wrote in a fundraising email sent this week. "It is a lot to ask, I know, but we feel personally obligated to make sure that every small business that extended us their good faith and credit is repaid."

The Wisconsin governor dropped out of the 2016 presidential race in September, and campaign finance reports released last month showed his short-lived campaign raised $7.4 million but spent money as quickly as it came. Those reports showed the campaign burned through about $90,000 a day, in part due to exorbitant salaries paid to a massive staff.

Walker's email noted that the race "didn't turn out the way we wanted" but stressed that he is back at work in his office in the state Capitol.

"While we are disappointed, there are always new ways to serve others and plenty of conservative reforms to enact in Wisconsin," Walker wrote. "For a kid who grew up in small-town America, whose family didn't have a lot of money, the opportunity to run for president of the United States is an experience I will never forget."

On Friday, Walker said that while he wouldn't be on the stage when Republican presidential candidates descend on Milwaukee for Tuesday night's debate, he plans to be in the audience with his family.

"Tonette and I and the boys will be there. We wanted to participate in it because it's here in Wisconsin. And because we know not just the candidates, we know a good chunk of the families," the governor said Friday. "A number of the governors, in particular, our families have known each other for years. We've gotten to know some of the senators along the way. And so it will be nice to welcome them here to the state of Wisconsin."

Walker will also make appearances on Monday with two 2016 hopefuls, former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush and U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio. Walker is scheduled to join Bush at a charter school event at La Casa de Esperanza in Waukesha, and attend a campaign fundraiser Rubio is doing for Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester).

The governor spoke with reporters at the Milwaukee Art Museum on Friday after addressing a young professionals convention there.

In his fundraising email, Walker briefly addressed questions about his political future.

"When God closes one door, another one opens," he wrote. "While I don't know exactly what the future holds, trust me, we will continue leading the fight for big, bold conservative change in Wisconsin and across America."

The liberal group One Wisconsin Now slammed Walker for doing fundraising rather than focusing on economic problems in the state, such as the announcement this week that the Oscar Mayer plant in Madison would be shuttering, resulting in the loss of 1,000 jobs.

"Wisconsin families are being thrown into chaos and losing their jobs because Scott Walker was more focused on chasing his own presidential ambitions than doing his job as governor," One Wisconsin Now Executive Director Scot Ross said. "And now, instead of taking even one iota of responsibility for his failure, he's shaking down donors to pay off the debt he rang up on the campaign trail paying bloated salaries to political operatives and even his own family."

On Friday, Walker said the decision by the corporate parent Kraft Heinz Co. to close Oscar Mayer in Madison was "part of a global corporate decision" that was "not a reflection of Wisconsin."

He added that he was still trying to meet with the Kraft Heinz CEO.

Walker had faced criticism from Madison Mayor Paul Soglin, who said he was mystified that the state had apparently not done anything to keep the plant in Wisconsin.

Walker responded Friday by voicing concern about people pointing fingers but added that he couldn't understand why Soglin didn't contact him if he was concerned about a possible plant closure.

"I think just about any other mayor we've dealt with in the state would immediately respond by reaching out to us. We had no communication from the mayor or his office to our office or to the Wisconsin Economic Development Corp.," Walker said. "That's a little surprising to us."