Taller buildings could soon be coming to South Bend.

The South Bend Common Council approved a text amendment Monday night to increase the maximum building height in an area of the East Bank neighborhood.

This area is where the Commerce Center is, where developer Matthews LLC has proposed a 9-story apartment building with a grocery store, pharmacy and parking garage.

There have been many attempts by Matthews LLC and the city to get this project fully approved.

His building was too tall for that area under the old ordinance.

Officials say increasing the height restriction will let Matthews LLC build and encourage future development.

But many said Monday night they're in favor of the project, but not the height.

“We're likely now to see the river ringed on both sides by high-rises, if this takes off,” said Steve Francis, who lives in South Bend.



A 2008 “East Bank Plan” established the height rules for the Central Business District, a portion of land in downtown and the East Bank area separated by the St. Joseph River.

"There were hundreds of people involved, including businesses, residences, people from all over the city who weighed in on what the East bank should look like," said Francis, who also weighed in on the plan.

He supported the plan that allowed buildings on west of the St. Joseph River to reach 150 feet and capping those to the East at 60 feet.

He says he'd like to see things stay that way.

The Council's amendment wants to increase the max building heights on the island to 150 feet.

Some council members say that would fit Matthews LLC 's 9-story apartment building and grocery store and spur future development.

"We want to be responsive to the neighborhood and community members that want this,” said Councilman Gavin Ferlic – (D) South Bend. “I think by moving this to 150 feet we're going to see some mixed-use development and a lot of progress in that neighborhood.”

Many say they want to see development, just not tall buildings.

Councilman Ferlic says the height changes wouldn't be drastic.

City leaders agree it's time to try something new.

“When you're in an area where the plan developments that you would hope drive the plan don't happen, it's really hard to execute,” said Brian Pawlowski, director of Community Investment. “That's why we think revisions of this nature are okay to do.”

People like Steve say they're not opposed to revisions but they would like to have more public input on the plans.

Revisions that would paint a new picture of what the future of their neighborhood will look like.

Council members said it was hard for some of them to vote on this tonight – because it wasn't just a vote on a single project – it's a decision that could change the neighborhood.