What the blazing hell is that? I haven’t ordered chinese! Yes, you haven’t, although we dared to take the initiative and brought forward the Wot Armory Type-analysis. The hard reason is, the servers are flooded again with the WG’s favourite cash-cow. We dedicate this article for the new buyers, the old buyers, for those who love them, for those who cannot stand them, for low tiers and high tiers, in short, for everyone. Because this tank brings out emotions from all of us.

Charcharo’s review

For the Horde!



Have you ever got the feeling, that something just does not belong? A sale stunt for the biggest market on Earth became an every hour reality on all servers. I’m afraid, I cannot be helped being opinionated, but the first introduction of the Type marked not only one of the biggest financial successes of Wargaming but the darkest hour for game balance.

Forerunner of the pay to win?

The Type then stood out among other toned down premium tanks compared to fully teched same tiers. It was not only a competitive tank, the favoured matchmaking and the still existing stacking lead to numberless random games, where Tier6 and 7 tanks (regardless of their module status) found themselves against these Tier8 credit-farmers, whereas Types didn’t have to face Tier10s. The matchmaking stacking created credit-hungry hordes, ad-hoc teams, mostly impervious to frontal fire of desperate lower tiers, and with enough mobility to counter flanking attempts, to hunt down those who tried to dodge/escape them. The Type also has exceptional tactical flexibility compared to other Tier8 premiums, the Type-wolfpacks could steamroll anything in their path. Dealing with such raider parties demand cooperation, map awareness and cold blood.

Great harvest is ahead. So said the golden tank… calf I mean. Or is this reference not Confucius enough?



The big cash-making had turned out to be a PR-disaster for the WG, so the Type 59 was removed from store, for a while. But the lack of availability created – maybe by purpose, since the continuous nerfs for the credit income of normal tanks – higher demand, and the chinese T-54 knock-off has reappeared in gift shop in the first week of May, where it could be bought only via real money, not with gold accumulated for lucky CW-fellas.

In the evening of the first day, numbers of the chinese tank long time not seen invaded the servers again. The favoured matchmaking had changed – partially – since the “dark ages”. These premium tanks can find themselves in Tier10 battles, but the stacking (putting the same tanks on one side) and problem of lower tier opponents in the opposite slots remained. One might think, the current matchmaking spread and the presence of the Types are tools for some forced evolution towards the more expensive and premium-demanding higher tiers…

The hull armor

Advertisements

Share this: Twitter

Facebook

Reddit

LinkedIn

Email

Like this: Like Loading... Related