Though each is demographically and physically unique, Canadian cities and towns will usually yield a number of tangible commonalities. You'll typically find a fire and police station, at least one school, a post office, and the town hall, where civic business is conducted. Sprinkled among these would be a host of shops and restaurants, many of which form the backbone of a lively main drag. But perhaps the most integral institutional asset — the public library — is really where the heart of the community lies. Not only are these valued establishments sources of free information, their ability to educate and foster engagement between family, friends, and even strangers becomes an immeasurable boon to the community.

The Library of Parliament in Ottawa, image by Marcus Mitanis

Many libraries across Canada have long been housed in historic brick or stone buildings, serving as a reminder of the institution's longevity across eras, even in spite of advancing technology that threatens the traditional library experience. It's important for a library to have a welcoming public face — something highly attractive on the outside will naturally invite users inside. While these preserved structures of yesteryear often catch the eyes of passersby, gleaming new libraries are popping up across the country too, challenging the lingering notion that libraries are an obsolete vestige of the past.

While not a public library, we'd be remiss not to mention the Library of Parliament in Ottawa, the nation's capital. Elegantly standing at the rear of the Centre Block, the Gothic Revival masterpiece is the only surviving section of the larger building's original incarnation, which was sadly gutted by a fire in 1916. Since its completion in 1876, the building has undergone multiple renovations, the most recent of which in 2006 saw a substantial rehabilitation of its facade.

A rendering of Calgary's Central Library, image via Snøhetta

The discussion in the thread for the upcoming Calgary Central Library inspired this article, with Calgarians proudly proclaiming the new facility among the best in the country. As the first pieces of cladding now appear, it's increasingly hard to argue with that position. With DIALOG, Norwegian architecture specialists Snøhetta have designed the under-construction building, adding to their list of bold and imaginative civic spaces. With an active LRT line piercing the base, and wood-laden interiors glowing with warmth, the library will become an instant icon in Calgary and a model for how buildings should interact with and integrate their surroundings.

The central branch of the Vancouver Public Library system, image by Flickr user Michael Muraz via Creative Commons

The central branch of Vancouver's Public Library system is anchored to the downtown core by a nine-storey rectangular box, which is hidden by a striking elliptical colonnade that houses diverse reading and study sections. A glass-roofed concourse bridges the gap between the two distinct structures, forming a grand entrance and animated pedestrian strip on the ground. The Colosseum-like building was the largest capital project undertaken by the City of Vancouver, and after a favourable public referendum, Moshe Safdie and DA Architects won the design competition for the development. An attached office highrise and an eclectic mix of retail and restaurants are also provided on the block, which was completed in 1995.

Surrey City Centre Library, image by Flickr user Colin Knowles via Creative Commons

The 2011-built Surrey City Centre Library is the second entry on this list from British Columbia. Replacing the Whalley Public Library, the Bing Thom Architects-designed complex forms part of a larger revitalization initiative undertaken in the downtown core. Awarded LEED Gold certification, the $36 million CAD project captures 7,200 square metres of usable space across four floors, though much of this space was not dedicated simply to standard book collections. Rather, the focus is on the reading and study spaces, which are arranged around a winding atrium culminating with two skylights. Illustrating the power of technology and social media, the building's modern architecture was heavily influenced by the needs and desires of the public, who were engaged through Facebook, Twitter, and Flickr throughout the design process.

The Toronto Reference Library, image by Marcus Mitanis

The Toronto Reference Library's interior motif of curving white balconies is somewhat similar in style, though it predates Surrey's by 34 years. Designed by Raymond Moriyama, the five-storey building also contains an airy atrium and skylight. This interior layout maximizes natural light and provides dynamic sightlines between floors. Located one block north of the busy intersection of Yonge and Bloor, the biggest public library in the city sees a steady stream of eager visitors every day. It's no coincidence either — with 100 branches, the Toronto Public Library network is the largest in Canada and the the world's busiest urban library system.

Halifax Central Library, image retrieved from Google Street View

Opened in 2014, the Halifax Central Library is one of the newest and most attention-grabbing libraries in Canada. Designed by Schmidt Hammer Lassen of Denmark with local practice Fowler Bauld and Mitchell, the flagship library replaced a surface parking lot at the corner of Spring Garden Road and Queen Street, a prime location in the downtown core. Designed to resemble stacked books, the building's cantilevered fifth floor is home to a light-filled indoor space called the Halifax Living Room, which features access to a cafe and a rooftop terrace. The elongated block hovers over the ground-level entry plaza in dramatic fashion. With an auditorium and multiple study spaces spread across the five-storey structure, the library has quickly become a central gathering place for Haligonians.

Calgary Central Library cladding installation, image by Forum contributor Surrealplaces

Canadians would be wise to pay a visit to their local library and discover everything it has to offer. From an architecture standpoint, the fusion between design and flexible educational spaces has spurred some truly amazing places that are worthy of in-person admiration. With Calgary's promising new library taking shape, the bar has certainly been set high for robust civic spaces in Canada.

Additional images and information about the Calgary Central Library can be found in the Database file linked below. Want to get involved in the discussion or share your photos? Check out the associated Forum thread or leave a comment at the bottom of this page.