Buy Photo Quentin Bird at a preliminary hearing in April. He is accused of killing his pregnant ex-girlfriend and her unborn child. (Photo: Stephanie Ingersoll/The Leaf-Chronicle)Buy Photo

A Clarksville man is facing additional murder charges after he was indicted this month and charged with killing both his girlfriend and her 8-month-old fetus.

Quentin Bird, 22, was indicted by the December grand jury on six counts in the stabbing death of 20-year-old Allison Tenbarge and her fetus at his Fairview Lane apartment on April 18.

He was originally charged with criminal homicide and had his case bound over to a grand jury in June.

►RELATED: Pregnant woman stabbed 21 times in slaying by ex-boyfriend, police say

According to the indictments, Bird "unlawfully, feloniously, intentionally and with premeditation" killed Allison Leigh Tenbarge by repeatedly stabbing her with a knife causing her to suffer fatal injuries.

The attack also intentionally killed Parker Jackson Tenbarge, a fetus in a stage of gestation in utero, by stabbing his mother.

The indictment charges Bird with two counts of premeditated, first-degree murder, two counts of felony murder and two counts of especially aggravated kidnapping.

According to testimony at his preliminary hearing, Bird stabbed his ex-girlfriend at least 21 times and could face the death penalty when the case goes to trial.

At a preliminary hearing in General Sessions Court, Clarksville Police Detective Eric Ewing testified that after Bird was tracked down in Kentucky, he confessed.

Allison Tenbarge had broken off the relationship a few days earlier and moved back to Kentucky but went to the apartment the morning of April 18 with a female friend to get her belongings.

Bird left work after finding out she was there and they argued, with Tenbarge accusing Bird of seeing other women.

Bird told Ewing that Tenbarge slapped him twice.

"He said she had slapped him and a switch flipped and he stabbed her two or three times," Ewing testified.

Tenbarge's friend left the apartment briefly after Bird asked her to buy him some gum and when she returned, he was gone and no one answered the door.

Bird texted her several times saying he was with Tenbarge running errands, but when police went to the apartment for a welfare check several hours later, they found her dead inside.

Clarksville Police tracked down Bird the day after the slaying with the help of OnStar in his Camaro and the Kentucky State Police and U.S. Marshals.

After the preliminary hearing, Assistant District Attorney Robert Nash told The Leaf-Chronicle that he planned to examine the autopsy file and may seek the death penalty because Allison Tenbarge was eight months pregnant.

"The victim was close to giving birth," Nash said. "It's a very serious matter. In this case, it is definitely being considered."

►RELATED: Man charged with killing pregnant ex-girlfriend in Clarksville

Reach Reporter Stephanie Ingersoll at singersoll@theleafchronicle.com or 931-245-0267 and on Twitter @StephLeaf

Read or Share this story: http://www.theleafchronicle.com/story/news/2017/12/22/clarksville-man-charged-murder-death-fetus/976989001/