

Home ~ Get The FREE Book ~ T Shirts ~ Contact Us We don't want to be locked into representation by agenda-driven political parties.



We believe that citizens should be able to guide their Representatives on how they want them to cast their district's house vote on every issue. To let the will of the people become the action of their Representative.



We believe Representatives should serve only three terms in the House and two terms in the Senate.



The only path to a transparent Democracy is by using technology to create a Direct Representative Democracy. Let the people rule the people!



Even after the election, everyone will still have an equal voice in our system.





In the 1700's when our forefathers drafted the Constitution, they never envisioned citizens having the ability to collectively communicate so easily with their Representatives.



Instead of letting our Representatives run wild for two years, let's use technology to collectively, as a community, guide them on how WE WANT them to cast OUR district's house vote.



If the people are going to live under a new law, they must have a say in the passing of that new law. YOUR ability to influence your Representative's actions should not end after Election Day.





It's no secret that the traditional political parties have developed rigid viewpoints. After an election, these parties get to decide who has access and control over their party's Representatives. This is why Congress frustrates us. They are failing the greater majority, the 7 out of 10 Americans who now feel that they have no representation in Congress - even those who voted for the "winners".



This philosophy is the culmination of five years of listening to hundreds of average people talking about their ideas on Democracy and how we're going to fix Congress. The Tech Party was born in Dania Beach and the philosophy was organized by one of the founding members Don Endriss . Tech Party members know one thing for sure, regardless of whether you agree with us or not, Direct Representative Democracy is coming. One way or another!





Help us to restore the joy of public service for the common good. YOUR opinion, YOUR voice, YOUR influence, should not end after Election Day! Together, with faith in our ability to focus on where Americans agree, strong ground will be created to move workable solutions forward.



If you believe in The Tech Party philosophy, please download and print the free PDF book and also e-mail the PDF to your family and friends.



It's time to combine something old with something new. Let's mix the original formula from 1776, with technology! Let the people rule the people!



Direct Democracy used in 435 individual districts creates

a perfectly transparent Direct Representative Democracy!



For more information:



Info@TheTechParty.com











Click here to help



www.TheTechParty.com © Copyright 2013 All Rights Reserved.



