Cops very likely to surprise the shit out of people by materializing out of nowhere in civilian-looking vehicles.

Phasing out the Crown Victoria.

Ken Kamami Blocked Unblock Follow Following Aug 22, 2017

If you can’t identify this as an undercover detective from a mile away, surrender your criminal license right away.

Let’s face it. Law enforcement has had a tough time this past decade trying to melt into traffic and launch surprise attacks on speeders or other more sinister actors. I used to be able to make out cops zigzagging half a mile behind me on the highway desperately trying to clock lead footers. I could tell the frustration on their faces and felt bad for whichever poor souls that couldn’t spot them on time. At the time, radar detectors were very popular. I loved the ones that scrambled the cop ones and made them spew out incomprehensible or unrealistic readings.

Nighttime cognito mode. Woe unto you if you couldn’t recognize these unmistakable headlights.

“Surely, that asswad can’t be doing 590.08 km/ hr? What’s km even? I’m getting too old for this.”

Those were king until they made the ones that even offered to pay speeding tickets if you could prove you were using them when you got busted. So traffic cops resulted to relying heavily on actually getting behind you and watching their speedometer. I was NEVER caught this way. And I ALWAYS sped. What’s the point of investing in a stick shift Honda Prelude or an Acura Integra if you won’t speed? That’s like buying a submarine and using it as a sightseeing canoe.

Speed is not the only offense frowned upon on the road. There’s the drug dealer who kidnapped a rival kingpin’s wife and is tugging at her hair while jetting down the freeway at breakneck speeds…and yelling at her. Before, he’d immediately stop doing that having easily discerned the iconic Ford’s grill. Now, these guys show up in Mustangs, Chargers and supercharged Explorers. So even if you see them in time and decide to make a run for it, they still end up reeling you in.