This post has been updated

Dozens of nurses filled a Multnomah County courtroom Friday afternoon to watch the sentencing of a woman who hurt one of their own.

Sierra McDonald, 25, was given five years probation for assaulting a nurse -- breaking her arm "like a chicken wing" -- and harassing a doctor. The medical professionals in attendance, many still dressed in blue scrubs, said the case illustrates the need for stricter laws and better enforcement when patients behave badly.

"It happens way more than you think it does, "said Bill Schueler, an emergency room nurse at Legacy Meridian Park Medical Center. "We all know it's a very bad problem."

Schueler, immediate past president of the Oregon Emergency Nurses Association, said the association is pressing for the passage of Senate Bill 132. Speaking for the association but not on behalf of Legacy, Schueler said the bill which would make assaulting a healthcare worker providing services in a hospital a Class C felony. A conviction would carry a maximum five years in prison, a $125,000 fine or both.

Multnomah County Deputy District Attorney Amanda Nadell asked Judge Thomas Ryan to impose a 36-month prison sentence on McDonald, who is currently serving time in the county for a prior conviction.

"The only way to keep the community safe is to incarcerate Miss McDonald," she said. "This is a woman with substantial anger problems."

Barbara Ward, a nurse at Legacy Emanuel Medical Center in Portland, was caring for McDonald in September when she was assaulted. McDonald broke her left arm "like a chicken wing," Ward said, and co-workers had to pull McDonald off of her. The attack occurred in front of McDonald's two young children.

"I would not feel safe if she were released," Ward told the court Friday, "nor would the roomful you see here."

Ian McKenna, an emergency room doctor at Randall Children's Hospital, said McDonald called him repeatedly and threatened to harm his wife and family. He said he'd provided medical care for McDonald many times and took her threats seriously.

"It's impairing our ability to take care of a lot of other patients as well," he said. "We're not in a position to protect ourselves in the hospital."

A third nurse said McDonald had yelled at her while providing her medication in prison.

McDonald sat quietly during the testimony, at times wiping her eyes with a tissue. She said she's been diagnosed with ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, and the pain and stress cause her to lash out. She also apologized to her victims and said she thinks therapy is already helping.

"I am genuinely sorry for causing them to be scared, scarred and traumatized," she said. "That's not who I am."

Chris O'Connor, McDonald's lawyer, said his client has worked hard to earn a high school diploma and is motivated to regain custody of her two children.

McDonald's father and brother were among her supporters in the courtroom. Charles McDonald apologized to his daughter's victims and said he'd like to see her get the support and help she needs.

Ryan sentenced McDonald to five years probation and warned her that she'll face prison time for violating any conditions. Her probation terms include completing 104 hours of community service, anger management courses and health evaluations. McDonald also is banned from Legacy Emanuel facilities and must pay about $6,000 in restitution.

"Take it to heart," Ryan said. "I hope to see you somewhere as a success."

After the hearing, McKenna said he worries that health care providers are still vulnerable to out-of-control patients. If SB 132 becomes law, he said, the threat of a stiffer penalty might lead to more patients acting appropriately.

"The current system is inadequate," he said. "Immediately, we need protection for hospital workers."

--Laura Frazier

503-294-4035; @frazier_laura

This post was updated with additional information about the OENA.