Yes I'm apart of the Overwatch bandwagon now! I am in love with all the characters and wanted to make my own! Since I am a writer and not a drawer I obviously went to my good friend to help bring my ideas and design to reality. She literally went to hell and back trying to draw this lmao Again pleeaaasssseeee go check out her page! she's an amazing artist. Her full lore, personality, and inspirations are below. This was just a fun thing I wanted to do quickly to take my mind off school and stuff. If you have any questions about her please feel free to askLore: Dorothea Giannidis grew up in a wealthy life and only lived with her father in addition to various omnic butlers and maids. Her father, Hugo Giannidis, worked for Overwatch as a scientist and he was revered in his work with Mercy and her healing technology. When the topic of using the healing tech in unethical ways came about, Hugo supported the idea which caused strife between Mercy and him. He went behind her back and started selling the tech for profit. He was exposed and excommunicated from Overwatch and had a warrant for his arrest out. He went into hiding and changed his last name but when Overwatch disbanded, he could sell his tech without opposition and became insanely wealthy. Dorothea disputed with her father a lot because of her fiery nature and often wandered off most of the time. She wanted to explore the world but because of her family's deeds, her father kept her on tight lockdown in their hometown of Illios, Greece. One day, she came back to her family home to see all of her friends(butlers and maids) destroyed and a T insignia spraypainted on the wall. She searched for her dad but could not find him. This caused her to start her journey of finding out what happened to her father. She stole various techs from her father's lab and began her quest. Along the way she saved a puppy from a fighting ring in Dorado and trained her to help her on her journey.Personality: Hecate loves to perform and is very lively and theatrical on stage. She often transfers this energy into her off-stage personality and is very dramatic in her ways. She's warm and kind with all of her fans and puts on free shows for them from time to time. Because of her rich upbringing, Hecate can be vain and cares about her appearance and social status. She can also be stubborn, hotheaded, and prideful often rushing actions without thinking. She is driven by her need to learn the truth about her family history, TALON, and her father. Hecuba is fierce and vicious on the battlefield but dopey, dumb, and cuddly outside of it.Gameplay: Her primary role is to support allies and debuff enemies. She should be in the fray do to her close range healing and close/mid range primary fire.Strengths- Great AOE abilities, does good damage, high utility, good sustainabilityWeaknesses- low mobility, inconsistent escape, long-ranged heroes,IdeasHighlight Intros:Good Girl- Hecuba runs up to Hecate and licks her face repeatedly causing Hecate to laugh.Easy as 1, 2, 3- Hecate summons her two illusions and does a variety of cute poses with themAbracadabra- Hecate performs her ult on Hecuba and rides on top of him as they rush towards the camera.Skins:Hecate as Queen of the Underworld and Hecuba as CerberusFashion Forward- Hecate and Hecuba in fashionable outfitsSummer Games-Synchronized Swimming outifits with HecubaHalloween- Hecate as Medusa and Hecuba as a stone GargoyleChristmas- Hecate as a Snow Queen and Hecuba as a Winter WolfInspirations:Greek Goddess Hecate, Mismagius, Little Witch Academia, Tangled Floating Lanterns, The Sun,