Mormon Church Opens in Ozark as Mormon Faith Grows Video

OZARK, Mo. -- A new Mormon church has opened its doors in Ozark.

It's the new home for the Ozark and Nixa congregations of The Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day Saints.

The growth of the Mormon faith has created a need for the new church in our area.

The LDS church in Ozark has had its doors open for about two weeks now.

Between the Nixa and Ozark wards, there are about 800 people who have already joined.

"It's a worldwide congregation of about 15 million people and growing," said Ozark Ward Bishop Robert Guison.

And the growth has been proven here in the Ozarks with a need for the brand new church.

"When i was young growing up in Monett, we had to come to Springfield," said Bishop Guison. "There are now seven stakes and each stake is approximately six to seven congregations-- so that's how much it's grown in my lifetime-- just in this area-- so there's been a tremendous amount of growth."

"It's been exciting to see the growth and people moving to the area," said Nixa Ward Bishop Michael Barker. "But also the natural growth from families -- and also those that choose to join the Mormon faith-- those that choose to investigate and join themselves to the church-- it's been fun."

Before, those of the Mormon faith in Nixa and Ozark had to drive to Springfield.

"Then, as the need grew, we were too crowded in that building," said Bishop Guison. "So the next choice was what would be the most benefit to members and the community? That's why this location was chosen."



"It gives a foundation to our faith, a sense of permanence," said Bishop Barker. "There's a lot of excitement to have our own building here in the Nixa-Ozark region."



The building includes classrooms, offices and a kitchen adjacent to the multi-purpose cultural hall that doubles as in indoor basketball court.

"There's a great sense of ownership and presence to have a building and a place we call home," said Bishop Barker. "Where we come together to worship and can invite people to come share our faith with us."

But, of course, for them-- it goes beyond that.

"The building is wonderful and represents progress and growth," said Bishop Barker. "But, more importantly, it represents our faith and the savior Jesus Christ and not only to serve him and our families, but to serve the community as Christians."

The chapel seats about 250 people.

The church serves both the Nixa and Ozark communities.





