CLOSE In Des Moines on Monday, at least 200 Iowans gathered to march at Mercy Hospital in support of higher minimum wages, fair union rights, and safe working conditions.

Buy Photo Hundreds of protestors gathered outside of Mercy Medical Center in Des Moines on Monday, Sept. 4, 2017, to advocate for union rights, higher minimum wage, and safer working conditions. According the the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics' 2016 report, Registered Nurses in Iowa were ranked 50th in salary. (Photo: Bryon Houlgrave/The Register)Buy Photo

Amy Smith's voice shook slightly as she talked to 200 workers in Des Moines Monday about the need for higher wages.

Smith makes $13 an hour as a certified nursing assistant at Mercy Medical Center but must also work a second job to help her and her fiance make ends meet.

"We're not comfortable," said the 23-year-old, who wants to return to school to become a nurse but struggles to save money.

"It's an important issue and worth being a little nervous for," Smith said. "I work with a lot of moms, and they need more money."

In Des Moines and across the nation, hundreds of workers spent their Labor Day calling for $15-an-hour minimum wage.

Organizers criticized Gov. Kim Reynolds and Iowa lawmakers for a law that rolled back minimum wage increases this year in Polk, Johnson, Linn and Wapello counties and prevented other counties from adopting higher wages.

Iowa's minimum wage is now $7.25 an hour.

Protesters said the current minimum pay leaves working families living in poverty.

The event, organized by the Fight for $15 and the Service Employees International Union, was one of dozens held nationally, targeting health care, fast food and other service industries.

CLOSE House Study Bill 92 would immediately roll back minimum wage increases approved in Polk, Johnson, Wapello and Linn counties. Kevin Hardy/The Register

Des Moines area workers marched at the Burger King on Southeast 14th Street and at Mercy Medical Center on Monday. They also closed a Burger King in Ankeny Sunday night.

Cathy Glasson, a registered nurse and Democratic candidate for governor, said more than half of Iowa health care workers earn less than $15 an hour.

Mercy-Des Moines' CEO "is making over $900,000 and most people caring for patients, cleaning the rooms, cooking the food, pushing the wheelchairs are making less than $15 an hour," said Glasson, who is president of SEIU Local 199.

Buy Photo Protestors march across 6th Ave. on their way to Mercy Medical Center in Des Moines on Monday, Sept. 4, 2017. Hundreds gathered to advocate for union rights, higher minimum wage, and safer working conditions. According the the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics' 2016 report, Registered Nurses in Iowa were ranked 50th in salary. (Photo: Bryon Houlgrave/The Register)

Sandy Doerring just finished a 12-hour shift at Broadlawns Medical Center before arriving at the protest across from Mercy.

The nurse said she's had to work two jobs for about 30 years to support herself and her family.

Iowa nurses earn an average of $26 an hour, but they rank 50th lowest nationally.

Doerring said many nurses train in Iowa, then move away to earn more.

"You can get a double-digit pay increases," she said.

Holly Muir said it's tough to support her 10-month-old son earning minimum wage at her Burger King job.

"Even $10 an hour would make a big difference," said Muir, 21, who must live with her mother so she has enough money to care for her son, QueLeone.

Buy Photo Hundreds of protestors gathered outside of Mercy Medical Center in Des Moines on Monday, Sept. 4, 2017, to advocate for union rights, higher minimum wage, and safer working conditions. According the the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics' 2016 report, Registered Nurses in Iowa were ranked 50th in salary. (Photo: Bryon Houlgrave/The Register)

Mike Duttlinger said he's worked as a cook for 20 years but earns only $8.25 an hour at Burger King.

The 53-year-old said he has little left after paying his housing costs, buying food and paying for gas.

"The money goes pretty fast," he said.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/2eDLEqy