After it was previewed as a concept at the Geneva Motor Show in March, everything has been a blur for this 350 km/h car that is run by a very unusual powertrain.

Using flow cell battery technology that can store 20 times more energy than a lead-acid battery and 5 times more capacity than the lithium-ion battery used by today’s electric cars, it can travel up to 600 kilometers on one full charge, distance only combustion engines can cover.

The nanoFLOWCELL technology can undergo 100 times more charging cycles than lead-acid and lithium-ion and only self-discharges at 1% per day if unused; all without the memory effect conventional batteries suffer through.

Peak power of the 4-seater QUANT e-Sportlimousine 912 HP but it can remain constant at 644 HP. Peak torque for each wheel is at 2,900 Nm. It will hit 100 kph in just 2.8 seconds.

Last July 22, 2014 and after extensive testing by the District Government of Upper Palatinate Bavaria the QUANT e-Sportlimousine was issued an official registration plate and finally allowed to road the roads of Germany and Europe.

“This is a historic moment and a milestone not only for our company but perhaps even for the electro-mobility of the future. For the first time an automobile featuring flow-cell electric drive technology will appear on Germany's roads. Today we have put the product of 14 years’ hard development work on the road,” said Nunzio La Vecchia, chief technical officer at nanoFLOWCELL AG.

“Approval of the QUANT e-Sportlimousine with the nanoFLOWCELL® drivetrain concept is a vital step forward for nanoFLOWCELL AG. The fact that only four months after the car's world premiere in Geneva we have received approval for the use of the QUANT e-Sportlimousine with nanoFLOWCELL® drivetrain concept on the road in Germany and in Europe indicates the dynamism with which our entire team is working on this project. And we are very much looking forward to the next stages of this exciting and promising journey,” states Prof. Jens-Peter Ellermann, chairman of the board of directors at nanoFLOWCELL AG.