By Charles L. Rulon

Emeritus, Life and Health Sciences

Long Beach City College (ruloncl@yahoo.com)

вҖңIt is not so much knowlВӯedge of science that the public needs, as a scienВӯtific world view вҖ” an underВӯstanding that we live in an orderly universe governed by physical laws that cannot be circumvented by any amount of piety or cleverВӯness.вҖқ вҖ” Robert L. Park, Professor of PhyВӯsics

How do humans think they know something?

There are basically four ways in which we think we know something:

вҖ”Authority: We read about it or heard about it from a source we trust.

вҖ”Senses: We experienced it with one or more of our senses.

вҖ”Reason: We reasoned it out based on what we already think we know.

вҖ”Intuition: We intuitively know it, sometimes through a вҖңreligious insightвҖқ.

The problem, of course, is that each of these four ways of knowing can be notoriously unВӯreliable. AuthoriВӯties can be mistaken; reasoning can be flawed; intuВӯitions can be wrong; our senses can be distorted. Consider the following once widely held belief:

вҖңItвҖҷs common sense that the Earth doesnвҖҷt spin or race around the Sun. If it did weвҖҷd all be blown off, or at least feel something. ArisВӯtoВӯtle logically proved that the Earth couldnвҖҷt be moving and St. Augustine, in direct communiВӯcaВӯtion with God, agreed. Even the Bible tells us in Psalms 104:5 that the Earth doesnвҖҷt move. So there!вҖқ

Yet, our senses, logic, common sense, inner knowВӯing and top authorities were all proved wrong. Our planet does dash through space, moving around our Sun at roughly 65,000 mph for the last several billion years! Now consiВӯder another widely held belief:

вҖңI just know we didnвҖҷt evolve from apes. ItвҖҷs too degrading and goes against GodвҖҷs plan for us and His word in Genesis. Besides, you canвҖҷt prove it, since no one ever saw a human evolve from an ape. ItвҖҷs just too impossible to believe.вҖқ

Yet, again, in spite of beliefs still held by over 40% of adult Americans, we really do have an extremely long evolutionary history. The supВӯporВӯВӯtВӯing eviВӯdence is just too compelling for any informed thinkВӯing perВӯson to deny. Once again, those who thought otherВӯwise based on intuition, their senses, scriptВӯural authority, or reason, were proved wrong. How? By a collection of powerful methods of inquiry deВӯveloped and polished over the last 400 years of human existence, now collectively referred to as the ScienВӯtific Method.

CurВӯrently milВӯВӯlВӯions of sciВӯenВӯtific and technological arВӯticles are being pubВӯВӯlished yearly in tens of thousands of different scientific jourВӯnals. This explosion of scienВӯtific knowВӯВӯledge has now imposed severe limitaВӯtions on the ability of any one scientist to stay current except in very narrow specialty areas. Science today is like an extremely rapidВӯly expanding region with a solid core of theories known to be true with a high level of certainty. As one moves outward from this core, theories become progresВӯsively more and more tentative.

The Scientific Method

The Scientific Method has turned out to be the most powerful and widely used method of inquiry humans have ever discovered for unВӯderВӯstandВӯing how our bodies, our world and our uniВӯverse workвҖ”not the way we might want things to work, not the way we believe things should work, but the way things actually seem to work. ItвҖҷs a way of discovering which hypotheВӯses among many possiВӯble explanaВӯtions are wrong, thus homВӯing in on the right ones. Correct explaВӯnaВӯtions open doors to ever deeper and more profound discoveries; wrong explanaВӯtions lead to blind alleys.

To do science requires a healthy skeptiВӯcism and high doses of logic, reason and intellectual honesty. The rational power of the human mind is highly respected. But this is not to imply that doing science is like following a cookbook with a particular recipe to follow. It requires considerable patience while stumbling down blind alleys, taking wrong turns, and sorting through incomplete and possibly biased data.

The Scientific Method requires following the evidence wherever it leads, despite personal beliefs or expectations. Its tools include formulating testable hypotheses to explain the raw evidence (observational, experimental, matheВӯmatical) on its own terms, rather than by вҖңforВӯcingвҖқ the data to conВӯform to some preconceived belief. Although imaginative speculation is essential, hypotheses have to stand up to the evidence. They also have to be capable of being proved false, at least in theory. Experiments and observations require rigorous controls and reproduciВӯbility by independent investiВӯgaВӯtors

The data, theories and laws making up science are not secured by authorities. For no matter how convinВӯcВӯing or inspired the authВӯorВӯВӯity may be, no matter how high in state, church, or even the world of science the authority may be, scientists always deВӯmand to see the hard eviВӯdence. When no evidence can be preВӯsented other than revelations in dreams, the вҖңvoice of God,вҖқ the writings from an ancient holy book, or glowing (yet unВӯconВӯtrolled) tesВӯtimonials, scienВӯtists must withВӯВӯhold accepВӯtance of the claim. Inserting вҖңGod did itвҖқ answers into gaps in scientific knowledge is scientifically unsound, since all research stops.[1]

In science, extraordinary claims (claims that conflict with large bodies of evidence to the contrary) require extraordinary empirical eviВӯdence to become widely acceptВӯed. Thus, when someone claims to have a piece of NoahвҖҷs ark, or eviВӯdence that weвҖҷve been visited by space aliens, or a human fossil found in the same rock layer as a dinosaur fossil, or evidence that intercessory prayer works in healing disВӯease, the Scientific Method requires that one remain very skepВӯtВӯiВӯcal. In such cases, scientists must demand strong empirical evidence obВӯtained unВӯder conditions of extraВӯordiВӯnary security to prevent any posВӯsiВӯbility of data tampering.

Scientific knowВӯledge is constantly upВӯdated through peer-reviewed journals and at science convenВӯtions throughout the world. Through this process errors are eventually caught and weeded out. Disagreements in science, although acrimonious at times, are usually resolved by more observations and experiments. Though much in science is now firmly established, no theories are beyond the possibility of revision in the light of new evidence.

One of the most striking features of the Scientific Method (and its resultant discoveries) is its universality. The rules and results donвҖҷt vary based on oneвҖҷs nationality, ethnicity, sex, or geography. There is no such thing as вҖңfeminine scienceвҖқ or вҖңAfrican-American science.вҖқ[2] Science is an onВӯgoing enterprise involving a vast inter-generational and global community.

The basic scientific ethic must be absolute honВӯesty in recordВӯing and preВӯsenting data. ItвҖҷs curbing wishes, personal prejudices and emoВӯВӯВӯtions when interВӯpreВӯtВӯing the evidence. ItвҖҷs bendВӯing over backВӯwards in trying to disВӯprove favorite hypoВӯtheses. As difficult as this is to do in practice, it still is the essence of scienВӯtific integrity, an integВӯrity many believe our society sorely needs.

вҖңScience is much more than a body of knowlВӯedge. It is a way of thinking [that] invites us to let the facts in, even when they donвҖҷt conform to our preconВӯcepВӯtions. вҖңIt urges us on to a no-holds-barred openВӯВӯness to new ideas, howВӯВӯever heretiВӯВӯcal, and the most rigorous skeptical scrutiny of evВӯeryВӯthingвҖ“both new ideas and estabВӯВӯlished wisВӯdom. We need wide appreciaВӯtion of this kind of thinkВӯing. It works. ItвҖҷs an essenВӯtial tool for demoВӯВӯВӯcВӯracy in an age of change.вҖқ

вҖ”Carl Sagan, astronomer

Religious вҖңtruthsвҖқ

Unlike scientific knowledge, religious beliefs and truths vary enorВӯmousВӯly over the planet, with deities and sacred dogВӯmas of every conВӯceivable variety, seemingly limited only by human imagiВӯnations. The following comparisons between science and religion tend to refer to the more conservative and fundamentalist religious sects.

вҖ”Unlike science, religion is not a method of inquiry, but a body of belief usually grounded in sacred texts, supernatural explanations, faith (commitment in the absence of compelling empirical evidence), and religious experiences.

вҖ”Unlike science, the skeptical questionВӯing of religious beliefs, dogmas and moral positions is often seen as sinful, even heresy. Instead, religious disagreeВӯments tend to be вҖңresolvedвҖқ by more prayer and study from holy books, or even by splintering into separate sects.

вҖ”Unlike science, different religions usually see themselves as rivals rather than interlocking parts of one enterprise. Historically, ostracism, coercion, righteous attacks and even warfare have been used against those with difВӯferent religious beliefs.

вҖ”Unlike science, in religion faith is seen as a virtue. In fact, the more extraВӯordinary the religious claim (by scientific standards), the stronВӯgВӯer the tendency of the faithful to believe that claim as a measure of the power of their faith. Many have been taught that to hold onto beliefs that have been disproved by science represents the highest of virtues, one to be rewardВӯed by God on the final judgment day. Examples include a literal belief in the bibliВӯcal creation stories, NoahвҖҷs ark, the ResurВӯrection and other religious miracles.

вҖ”Unlike science, religious believers вҖңknowвҖқ they have God-given inerrant truths in their holy books. Thus, religious dogmas and moral positions rareВӯly (or very slowly) change in light of new conflictВӯing scientific and historical knowledge. Instead, considerable energy is often spent in either willfully ignoring or attemptВӯing to discredit those scientific findings, rational inquiries and ethical advances that conflict with religious dogmas. The power of human intelligence is often dismissed or belitВӯtled in such cases.[3] Thus, enormous ignorance regarding how our universe actually seems to work can remain hidden under cloaks of exaltВӯed and righteously guarded sacred prose.

The abuse of science

The discoveries of science and the development of assoВӯciated technologies have had enormous benefits for huВӯmanВӯkind in the past few centuries. Agricultural and medical advances have exploded, markedly reducing pain and suffering and contribВӯuting to human welfare and happiness.

But in the hands of our recently evolved fallible brain and the political, social and religious institutions emerging from this brain, scientific and technological discoveries have also led to horrific nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and have dramatically accelerated our global ecological destrucВӯtion.

Today, we have power structures that disregard scienВӯtific consensus and expertise in favor of ideological alliances. This abuse of power has a serious corrosive effect on the publicвҖҷs trust in science. When scientific information becomes manipulated and corrupted by partisan politics and/or by corporate power and greed to achieve political, financial or religious ends, the quality and integrity of the political process inevitably suffers. вҖңIt is the failure of the public to appreciate the power of the scientific method to discover truth, and to lift the human species out of the muck that enables politicians to ignore its findings in shaping public policy.вҖқ

вҖңWhat the world needs is not dogma but an attitude of scientific inquiryвҖқ

вҖ” Bertrand Russell

Some final thoughts

Applying rational critical thought to all areas of knowВӯledge, inВӯcluding formerly taboo subjects such as reliВӯgion, is one hallmark of an educated mind. Being scientifically skepВӯtical is not the same thing as being closed-minded, cynical or pessimistic. A scientific atВӯtitude helps to protect us from being seduced by superВӯВӯВӯstiВӯtion, prejudice, pseudoscience, quackery and error. The demand for solid eviВӯdence helps to clear the way for intelВӯlecВӯtual proВӯgress. After all, foolВӯВӯВӯishВӯness, fraud, fakery, error, wishВӯful thinking, over-enВӯthuВӯВӯsiasm and deluВӯsion are very common human attributes. If we wish to live in sociВӯeties that value reaВӯson, honesty, creaВӯtivity, knowВӯledge, truth and integВӯrityвҖ”socieВӯties that are opposed to ancient, irraВӯtional and someВӯtimes harmful superВӯstitions and dogmasвҖ”then a scienВӯtific and rational look at these dogВӯmas becomes essential.

HonВӯest doubt is not a blemВӯish upon our ability to know. The alternaВӯtive to uncertainty is authority against which scienВӯtists have fought for centuries.

вҖ”Richard Feynman

вҖ”вҖ”вҖ”вҖ”вҖ”вҖ”вҖ”вҖ”вҖ”вҖ”вҖ”вҖ”вҖ”вҖ”вҖ”-

[1]Inserting вҖңGod did itвҖқ answers into scientific unknowns is also bad theology. The strength of oneвҖҷs faith now depends on whether or not scienВӯtists can fill this gap in our knowledge. Since scientists have been extremely sucВӯcessВӯful over the last few centuries in replacing вҖңGod did itвҖқ answers with naturalistic explanations, the risk of oneвҖҷs faith being undermined is quite high, as biblical literalists have been painfully discovering for centuries.

[2]This is not to deny that in fields such as sociology, psychology and cultural anthropology, female scientists and African-American scientists have often asked quite different questions than have white male scientists and have even exposed considerable white male bias.

[3]Some biblical passages used by believers to dismiss or denigrate rational thought: вҖңThe wisdom of the Lord can only be unВӯderВӯstood by the spiritВӯual man. The unВӯsaved just cannot underВӯstand these matters (Mark 9:42, I Cor. 2:13, Col. 2:8).вҖқ вҖңAvoid the Godless mixВӯture of conВӯtradictory notions which is falsely known as knowledge. Some have followВӯed it and lost their faith (1 Tim. 6:20).вҖқ вҖңBe careful that nobody spoils your faith through intelВӯlectВӯualism or high sounding nonsense. (Col. 2:8).вҖқ