The video will start in 8 Cancel

Get the biggest daily news stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Islamic State supporters have claimed that Downing Street, Gatwick and Heathrow "are next" after the Brussels terror attacks in a sickening new video.

The new footage shows two men in balaclavas with British accents addressing the camera.

Speaking together, they say: "Belgium, Brussels airport... Big boom went off, innit!

"Heathrow, Gatwick, Downing Street... You're next. You get me bruv?

"Brap brap, yeah what! What!"

At least 31 people were killed following three explosions at Zaventem Airport and Maelbeek metro station during the attacks on Tuesday.

The threat comes as security has been "stepped up" at checkpoints staffed by British officials on borders.

However the increase in security will last for only two weeks.

Lucy Moreton, general secretary of ISU, said: "We’ve stepped up controls at the border, and at all borders, but it is maintaining that at a high level for a long period of time and whether there is the political will, or potentially even the necessity to do so.

(Image: Getty)

"Experience from past would suggest that it isn’t. The increased checks at the border last about two weeks, or that’s how long they lasted after the Paris attacks."

Read more:

Alongside those who lost their lives during the attacks, more than 270 were injured, including children who lost limbs.

Following the terror attack, ISIS formally claimed responsibility.

(Image: Getty)

A statement read: "Islamic fighters carried out a series of bombings with explosive belts and devices on Tuesday, targeting an airport and a central metro station in the center of the Belgian capital Brussels, a country participating in the international coalition against the Islamic State.

Read more:

"Islamic State fighters opened fire inside Zaventem Airport, before several of them detonated their explosive belts, as a martydom bomber detonated his explosive belt in the Maalbeek metro station.

(Image: REUTERS)

Read more:

"The attacks resulted in more than 230 dead and wounded."

ISIS supporters posted threats on Twitter, warning social media users of supposed planned attacks.

One tweeted: "The Islamic State will attack London, Washington, Rome and all the infidels' capitals."

(Image: PA)

Another wrote: "The Crusaders are blundered and confused. Yesterday Paris, today Brussels, and they don't know where will be the next attack."

Home Secretary Theresa May revealed yesterday in the House of Commons that intelligence services had foiled seven terror plots on British soil in the last 18 months.

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

FOOTAGE COURTESY OF MEMRI