Luxury isn’t just about something being expensive, it’s about feeling the craftsmanship and conveying the artisan spirit. I want you to experience the thought and effort that went into creating your Smashing yoyo when you receive one. Everything from the yoyo itself, the packaging, even the box it’s shipped in has some thought behind it. Finding the right packaging was an interesting experience. There are so many people trying to sell me unique and interesting boxes at a wide range of prices.

The constant need to keep the price down means my choices are more and more limited but regardless of price, I’ve found the perfect box for the Poppet. It’s unique, attractive and totally perfect for the Poppet. Picking just the right extras for the inside was another interesting fight. I debated about so many things but in the end, decided some nice stickers and a badge for every yoyo so you can show off the Smashing YoYo Company logo wherever you go.

Every yoyo also comes with a nice pouch and it all fits nicely in the pretty box with a shiny sticker on the front to complete that luxury feel. Check out this unboxing video from Andrew Woodford to see for yourself.

It all comes together to give you a nice unboxing experience that you’ll remember and will get you excited to play with your new Poppet. I’ve had a lot of fun and anguish creating this experience and I hope it’s everything for you, that I’ve imagined it will be.

To end the post and provide an update we have some special 50/50 edition Poppets available for the drop day. They are limited to 1 of each and will be £67. You can view them yourself, right now on the store page. Finally, it’s sad but necessary to announce that we have no more of the G Squared Unicorn Acid Fade Poppets because they were so popular among the team and reviewers with the final 2 being sold at the UK National YoYo Contest on the 2nd. They will not be available to buy but we have plenty of everything else. The drop is 6pm GMT on Sunday 17th, don’t miss out!