Your Bitcoin transactions The Ultimate Bitcoin mixer made truly anonymous. with an advanced technology. Mix coins



Advertised sites are not endorsed by the Bitcoin Forum. They may be unsafe, untrustworthy, or illegal in your jurisdiction. Advertise here.

ripper234



Offline



Activity: 1274

Merit: 1000





Ron Gross







LegendaryActivity: 1274Merit: 1000Ron Gross Re: [ANNOUNCE] BTCtoX - Rate Converter between BTC and other currencies June 23, 2012, 11:35:16 AM #11 I just deployed a new version with these improvements:



1. Fixed the API documentation page, it didn't work well.

2. Added weighted average over 1,7,30 days to the API (not to the app itself ... not sure it's needed there, and the app should be redesigned in a nicer way anyway).

3. Added caching! I discovered that BitcoinCharts doesn't like it when API requests are made more than once every 15 minutes... so now I'm caching all outgoing API requests to speed up the process. BitcoinCharts data will be cached for 16 minutes, Mt. Gox and Open Exhcange will be cached for 2 minutes just to get a speed boost.



I'm particularly happy about bullet number 3, because it gave me a chance to play around with Memcached for the first time (it's a bit of an overkill for this project, but it's really simple using Play Framework & Heroku, so I wanted to give it a try ... and it was really easy to implement & deploy).



Please give it a test drive and report any issues.



Ron

Executive Director

Co-founder of the Israeli Bitcoin Association Please do not pm me, use ron@bitcoin.org.il instead Mastercoin Executive DirectorCo-founder of the Israeli Bitcoin Association

frisco2



Offline



Activity: 274

Merit: 250







Sr. MemberActivity: 274Merit: 250 Re: [ANNOUNCE] BTCtoX - Rate Converter between BTC and other currencies June 24, 2012, 07:49:12 PM #14 This is an idea, since I'm not in trading -- but if there was an API to retrieve a dump of prices in many exchanges, one could build a graph structure and try to compute a cycle of trade to make money. For example, I know that I can buy bitcoin at the cavirtex for CAD for less than mtgox, then sell it for USD on mtgox, move the money accross the border back to canada with RBC USA free cross-border transfer, and be in net profit. Of course there are commission fees in the exchanges, but it is a matter to have all the data quickly retrieved in one location, and running some search and optimization code on it. Since you are querying all those exchanges anyways, maybe you can bunch up all the data into one json, and allow people to make such an application of off your api? Just10.com -- Ad-Free Private Social Network for just 10 of your friends.