This shop has been compensated by Collective Bias, Inc. and its advertiser. All opinions are mine alone. #DairyFree4All #CollectiveBias

This Frozen Pumpkin Pie was created using the So Delicious Dairy Free® brand Coconut Vanilla Bean and Cashew Salted Caramel Cluster Frozen Dessert (my personal addiction). If you’ve followed me for awhile now, you already know my love for this company. I’m a huge fan of the entire range of products they offer.

Our So Delicious Frozen Pumpkin Pie begins with a layer of gingerbread crust followed by the Coconut Vanilla Bean turned pumpkin (more on that in a minute) and finally, in its pure form, the Cashew Salted Caramel Cluster. As if it wasn’t already decadent enough, I topped each slice with a drizzle of vegan caramel sauce, chocolate sauce and sweetened cacao nibs. The perfect vegan dessert! Are you drooling yet? 🙂

The first step in creating this mouth-watering dessert is to prepare the gingerbread crust. Many brands of gingerbread cookies are “accidentally” vegan meaning they don’t generally contain eggs or milk products. Just check the label before you buy. I crush the cookies in a food processor, add brown sugar, a small amount of all-purpose flour, a pinch of salt and to hold it all together, melted vegan margarine. You could also use coconut oil here. Press the mixture into a pie plate and bake for about 10 minutes. Remove to a wire rack to cool completely. (You could also opt to purchase a pre-made graham cracker crust if you prefer).

Meanwhile, it’s time to turn that Coconut Vanilla Bean into pumpkin! It is as simple as softening the Coconut Vanilla Bean until you can manipulate it easily with a spoon. We’ll add pure pumpkin puree and pumpkin pie spice. Combine well and return to the freezer for at least 30 minutes. If you don’t have pumpkin pie spice on hand, don’t worry…I’ve got you covered! Just click here for a recipe using ingredients you likely already have in your cupboard.

Now you’ll want to prepare a vegan caramel sauce if making a homemade version (plenty of recipes on the Web) and soften the Cashew Caramel Cluster. I’ll also get the pumpkin frozen dessert softening at this time. You want them spreadable and soft, but not melted.

Once you complete the layers, put back into the freezer for at least an hour to firm up and then it’s ready to slice! Run a sharp knife under very hot water and wipe clean in between slicing. This makes your job A LOT simpler.

The final step is to garnish. You can use chocolate syrup, caramel sauce (or both) and a few sweetened cacao nibs as we did here today if you want to get fancy 🙂

I found the So Delicious Dairy Free® Frozen Desserts in the frozen dessert aisle at my local Scottsdale, AZ Walmart. Some of these flavors are available at specialty grocers, but how great is it that these vegan treats are now becoming so easily accessible in a store as mainstream as Walmart? Yay. Progress!

Taste is, of course, the main reason I love the SO Delicious Dairy Free® brand, but did you know that not only are they completely vegan, but also Non-GMO Project Verified. They are cholesterol-free, contain no artificial colors, flavors or preservatives, no high-fructose corn syrup and are certified kosher. Definitely products you can feel good about eating.

To learn more about SO Delicious Dairy Free®, please visit their website or any of their social media pages: … Instagram, Facebook or Twitter.

What will you create with So Delicious Dairy Free® Frozen Desserts? Let me know in the comments below and if you make this frozen pie, tag me on Instagram @theveglife1. I love seeing what you come up with! 🙂

Before you go, why not check out some of our recent videos and be sure to subscribe to the YouTube Channel! 🙂