Nairaland Forum / Nairaland / General / Health / Youngest Birth (31250 Views)

Ola Orekunrin, The Youngest Doctor In England At Age 21 / LINA MEDINA, The Youngest Mother Ever / Can This Be True? (the Youngest Mother Ever ) 5 Years Old (2) (3) (4)

(1) (Reply) (Go Down)

The youngest mother on record was a five year old Peruvian girl. Lina Medina made medical history when she gave birth by caesarean section in May 1939. Her parents initially thought she had a large abdominal tumour but doctors later confirmed she was actually pregnant. Lina gave birth to a healthy boy which she named Gerardo after a doctor at the hospital. Gerardo grew up alongside his mother and always considered her his sister until he was told the truth when he was ten year old. Lina and her husband still live in Peru but Gerardo died in 1979.



Let's not even talk of who impregnated her, what about her reproductive organs? At that age the girl shouldn't even have sex hormones!(at least fully developed and functioning ones).

Haba! According to the biology them teach us for school, a girl has to start menstruating before she can get pregnant. At 5 her ovaries are not fully developed not to talk of releasing an egg that will become fertilized. Is that report for real? Where did the girl even get the womb to hold the pregnancy for 9 months? I am shocked beyond words. How possible?Let's not even talk of who impregnated her, what about her reproductive organs? At that age the girl shouldn't even have sex hormones!(at least fully developed and functioning ones).Haba! According to the biology them teach us for school, a girl has to start menstruating before she can get pregnant. At 5 her ovaries are not fully developed not to talk of releasing an egg that will become fertilized. Is that report for real? Where did the girl even get the womb to hold the pregnancy for 9 months? I am shocked beyond words.

fake story. only 13 years have this record in nigeria

Am astonished to read that its a fake story. Why dont you do a research to know who has the record of youngest birth. Presently there is a 10 year old who is 7 months pregnant is Cape Town, South Africa and someone is saying a 13 year old Nigerian has the record. Look beyond your horizon

@ poster, so the 5 year old mother thing is fake. The 10 year old thing is possible, that one i go agree, because some girls attain puberty really fast. It's saddening, some of them get pregnant and don't even know what is happening to them

@Ejadamen. U never do wetin i asked to do. Just do the research and tell me who has the record.

This Health sec. seriously needs a Mod.

I talked about her on a thread about crazy father shagging their children.

this girl got her period when she was 8months old and had "almost"fully developed breast at 4 and had had the ovaries of a fully mature woman. she was raped by a relative (no one knew who the father was) gave birth to her baby at the age of 5yrs 7months and 21days exactly BY CESAREAN and she is the youngest mother on record.

people didnt know she was pregnant until the pregnancy was about 7months old, they took her to the doctor and thought she had a tumor ONLY TO REALIZE SHE WAS PREGNANT.



the youngest NIGERIAN mother is a girl of 8YRS OLD called Mum-zi who was part of chief Akkiri's harem from Calabar.

At the age of seven, Mum-zi joined the harem of Chief Akkiri, ruler of the estuary of Calabar, Nigeria. Shortlyafter her betrothal,

Mum-zi became pregnant. At the age of 8 years and 4 months, she gave birth to a perfectly normal, well-developed baby girl.

her daughter also became a mother at 8 making Mum-zi a grandmother at 17. she holds the record!!!!! (but unfortunately no photo proof for that one!)



here is a picture of Lina Medina :

(on the second photo, thats her, the doctor and her baby)





I was concerned about how possible it was for a 5 yr old girl to deliver scientifically but Mr. BrownJay has answered my question beautifully by supplying that the girl got her period when she was 8 months old. That means she developed prematurely, same thing with the 8yr old Nigerian girl. But na wa o! @ yousouph, you were right.I was concerned about how possible it was for a 5 yr old girl to deliver scientifically but Mr. BrownJay has answered my question beautifully by supplying that the girl got her period when she was 8 months old. That means she developed prematurely, same thing with the 8yr old Nigerian girl. But na wa o!

This is really serious.

Ewww

@Mrbrownjay. I havent heard of the Nigerian lady even being a grand mother at 17. Which year is that? I will keep it in my book. Thanks for sharing your knowledge on NL





it is almost unbelievable!



tanx for this research i no fit shoutit is almost unbelievable!tanx for this research





here is a list of the world youngest mothers ON RECORD, funny enough the 3 youngest mothers are from PERU, WTF!!!!!

Age 5

-1939: Lina Medina of Paurange, Peru gave birth to a 2.7 kg son (5.9 lb), Gerardo, by caesarean section on Mother's Day, May 14, 1939 in Lima at the age of 5 years, 7 months and 21 days. Her parents, who assumed their daughter had a tumour, took her to a hospital, where she was determined to be seven months pregnant. Although Medina's father was arrested on suspicion of child molesting, he was later released due to lack of evidence, and the identity of who impregnated Medina was never uncovered. [1][2]



Age 6

-1939: The Los Angeles Times quoted Dr. Joseph B. De Lee, obstetrics authority of Chicago Lying-in Hospital, as saying that a German medical journal has already reported that a Russian girl, age 3 1/2, had become a mother, and that this girl had the physical development of a 18 or 20 year old.



Age 8

-2006: A girl from Huánuco, Peru, gave birth to a baby weighing 2 kg (4.4 lb) by caesarean section at a hospital in Lima in December 2006. Her ninth birthday occurred a couple of days later. She became pregnant after being raped by two of her cousins.



Age 9

-1957: Hilda Trujillo gave birth to a girl weighing over 6 lb (2.7 kg) at a hospital in Lima, Peru in December 1957. Her 22-year-old cousin, who was staying in her family's one-room house at the time, was arrested for rape.

-2001: Wanwisa Janmuk gave birth in February 2001 to a girl at a hospital in Phetchabun, a northern province of Thailand. The father was her 27-year-old husband; Thai law allows minors to marry with parental permission.



check the rest of the list here:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_youngest_birth_mothers the Nigerian one has never been confirmed, but it has been well reported, even once featuring on tv "Ripley's believe it or not"here is a list of the world youngest mothers ON RECORD, funny enough the 3 youngest mothers are from PERU, WTF!!!!!-1939: Lina Medina of Paurange, Peru gave birth to a 2.7 kg son (5.9 lb), Gerardo, by caesarean section on Mother's Day, May 14, 1939 in Lima at the age of 5 years, 7 months and 21 days. Her parents, who assumed their daughter had a tumour, took her to a hospital, where she was determined to be seven months pregnant. Although Medina's father was arrested on suspicion of child molesting, he was later released due to lack of evidence, and the identity of who impregnated Medina was never uncovered. [1][2]-1939: The Los Angeles Times quoted Dr. Joseph B. De Lee, obstetrics authority of Chicago Lying-in Hospital, as saying that a German medical journal has already reported that a Russian girl, age 3 1/2, had become a mother, and that this girl had the physical development of a 18 or 20 year old.-2006: A girl from Huánuco, Peru, gave birth to a baby weighing 2 kg (4.4 lb) by caesarean section at a hospital in Lima in December 2006. Her ninth birthday occurred a couple of days later. She became pregnant after being raped by two of her cousins.-1957: Hilda Trujillo gave birth to a girl weighing over 6 lb (2.7 kg) at a hospital in Lima, Peru in December 1957. Her 22-year-old cousin, who was staying in her family's one-room house at the time, was arrested for rape.-2001: Wanwisa Janmuk gave birth in February 2001 to a girl at a hospital in Phetchabun, a northern province of Thailand. The father was her 27-year-old husband; Thai law allows minors to marry with parental permission.check the rest of the list here:





Peru seems to be breeding prematurely developed girls. What's with all this pedophile relatives?Peru seems to be breeding prematurely developed girls.

This kinda stuff makes R Kelly look like Mother Theresa

as i said on another thread earlier, we have to educate children VERY EARLY in their lives on what a person CAN and CANNOT do with them. as we can see by this list, many of the rapist were known acquaintances/family members.

everyone should teach their children that NOBODY should touch their "pee pee" apart from daddy and mummy. no friends, no auntie, no babysitter, no teacher N O B O D Y !!!!!!!!!!!

we can see from the everyday news that this "trend" is rising all over the world and that children are easy prey.

TEACH YOUR KIDS!!!!!!