Andy Sinton appointed QPR club ambassador

Former QPR and England international will promote the name of the R's

Sinton commences new position from 15th June 2015

FORMER QPR winger and England international Andy Sinton is returning to Loftus Road as Rangers’ first club ambassador.





Sinton, who made 161 league starts for the Hoops during his four and a half year stay in W12, will embark on his new role from June 15th, working for the club and its charitable arm, QPR in the Community Trust.





In his new role as an ambassador, Sinton’s initial duties will include attending matches, working with commercial partners, supporting club-wide events and initiatives, and working closely with the PR, marketing, and community departments to help promote the name of QPR.





“I’m very excited about the new role,” Sinton told www.qpr.co.uk.





“Ever since I left the club I have always said that I wanted to come back in some capacity at some stage and this feels like a perfect fit, promoting the good name of Queens Park Rangers Football Club across a variety of mediums.









BACK: Andy Sinton has returned to a new role at Loftus Road





“Football is everything I know and love and to stay involved in the game is fantastic. To do that at QPR, where I enjoyed the best years of my career, is even better





“I’ve always had a good relationship with the fans, on and off the field, better than anywhere else I played, so to work closely again with them in the community and on matchdays is going to be an amazing experience for me.





“It’s going to be an absolute pleasure and a privilege.”





QPR Chairman, Tony Fernandes, added: “This is a really important appointment.





“Andy is one of a number of former players who share a great affiliation with QPR and utilising him across all areas of the club to promote what we do is a massive step in the right direction for us.





“It's important that he gets out in the community and shows what QPR is – a family football club.









AMBASSADOR: Sinton will help promoted the name of QPR in the community





“He is a vibrant, infectious personality and I am sure he will flourish in this role.





“With Andy and Les back at QPR, we now have people with very deep roots in the club, which we – as a board – deem hugely important.”





QPR’s Head of Media & Communications, Ian Taylor, will work closely with Sinton and is excited about the return of the 49 year-old, commenting: “Andy lives and breathes football, and especially all things QPR, so when the opportunity arose to bring someone into this role, he was the ideal candidate.





“He will play an integral role across all areas of the club, working closely with the Trust especially, to promote QPR on a local, national and international scale.”





Further details regarding Sinton’s involvement at QPR will be made in due course, but in the meantime, welcome back Andy!





See also ...



