UPDATE (July 29, 4 p.m.): Vancouver Police have released new photos of one of the men involved in the home invasion.

Initially, they described one suspect as having full sleeve tattoos on both arms. Investigators now have higher quality photos of him, which reveal the tattoos are not sleeves, but are quite distinctive, with the one on the right forearm appearing to be tribal style with a scorpion.

“Police are hoping the release of these additional photos will result in that one tip needed to positively identify the two men,” says VPD Cst. Brian Montague in a statement.

“Someone knows who they are and we hope that the appalling circumstances of the crime will convince someone to come forward.”

Two men are wanted for questioning in connection with a home invasion in East Vancouver involving a seven-year-old child.

According to Vancouver police, two men dressed in construction gear forced their way into a home in the 3300-block of Dieppe Street at about 3:30 p.m. on June 17.

One of the men, who was carrying a gun, pointed it at the seven-year-old girl and demanded money. She then went to her parent’s bedroom and handed over a jar of change.

A man in the home was hurt and taken to hospital for a non-life threatening injury to his head.

VPD Sgt. Randy Fincham said a number of undisclosed items were stolen from the home, including a rare and unique watch — a Rolex Yachtmaster II steel and rose-gold watch.

The two suspects were last seen walking away from the front entrance of the home, south on Dieppe Street.

The first man is described as 25 to 45 years old with a slim build, shaved head and full sleeve tattoos on both arms. The other man is dark-skinned, 20 to 30 years old with a medium build and a thin beard.

“It’s very unique there’s a small child that was victimized during a home robbery or home invasion,” Fincham said. “This was a heinous robbery, which will have an impact on a seven-year-old child and her family for the rest of their lives.”

It is currently unclear why the East Vancouver home was targetted and Fincham said they have tried a number of investigation steps to track down the two suspects as well as the stolen watch.

“The quicker we can identify the two men the quicker we can get them off the streets.”

Anyone with information about the identity of the two men is asked to call the VPD Major Crime Section at 604-717-2541 or Crime Stoppers.

PHOTOS: