Hegarty Announces Fall Schedule

Schedule | PDF Schedule

FAYETTEVILLE, Ark. – Seven individual tournaments across the country will highlight a competitive fall slate for the 2017-18 Arkansas women’s tennis team, head coach Michael Hegarty announced Monday.

“We are very excited about the fall schedule,” Hegarty said. “It’s probably our toughest one since 2009. We will use it to test us greatly in preparation for another step forward this spring. We lost two great seniors in Shannon (Hudson) and Sasha (Shkorupeieva), but we return such a loaded group and know we have one of the top newcomers in the nation.”

The fall campaign will begin Sept. 15-17 with the Razorbacks heading to the Midland Invitational in Midland, Texas. Arkansas will then compete in the Milwaukee Classic in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, from Sept. 21-24, before traveling to Evanston, Illinois, for the Northwestern Invite from Sept. 29-Oct. 1.

The Riviera/ITA Women’s All-American Championships is scheduled for Oct. 1-9 at the Riviera Tennis Club in Pacific Palisades, California. Individual selections for the nationally renowned tournament will be announced at a later date.

Arkansas will then compete in the Husky Classic in Seattle, Washington, from Oct. 13-15.

The ITA Central Regional Championships is set for Oct. 19-23 in Lawrence, Kansas. The ITA Regional Championships will feature some of the top men’s and women’s players across the country. Over 8,000 student-athletes from NCAA Division I, II, III, NAIA, Junior and Community Colleges compete across 85 ITA Regional Championships around the nation.

Select Razorbacks will compete in the inaugural Oracle ITA National Fall Championships from Nov. 1-5 at the Indian Wells Tennis Garden in Indian Wells, California. The 2017 Oracle ITA National Fall Championships, which serves as the concluding event to the fall portion of the college tennis schedule, is the only intercollegiate event to feature competitors from all five divisions competing for a national championship.

Arkansas will return 10 letterwinners from a squad that captured the program’s 15th NCAA Team Championship bid and posted 18 wins in 2017. The Razorbacks defeated 11 teams featured in the final national rankings, including No. 14 Auburn, No. 16 Texas A&M, No. 21 LSU and No. 24 Tennessee. Arkansas checked in at No. 19 in the final national rankings after holding a top-20 ranking in each of the last 10 weeks of the season.

For more information on Arkansas Women’s Tennis, follow @RazorbackWTEN on Twitter.