The Eastern Conference semfinal is turning into a war of attrition between the Raptors and Heat.

Toronto's DeMarre Carroll is questionable for Game 6 Friday in Miami after injuring his wrist in Toronto's 99-91 win on Wednesday. He has a left wrist contusion.

Like Carroll, Miami's Luol Deng left Game 5 in the third quarter with a left wrist injury.

Raptors all-star DeMar DeRozan spent time in the locker-room in the fourth quarter, having a bum thumb attended to, but returned with 4:17 remaining. He said it felt "like a blow torch on my hand."

Miami centre Hassan Whiteside (knee) didn't even make the trip to Toronto and remains day-to-day. Raptors big man Jonas Valanciunas (ankle) was seen after the game, minus his walking boot but moving slowly with a big limp. He is out for the series.

Toronto all-star Kyle Lowry is sporting new Band-Aids each game and is nursing a sore elbow. Heat point guard Goran Dragic needed eight stitches when his teeth went through his bottom lip after a hard collision with DeMar DeRozan in Game 2.

Carroll's absence is cause for concern given he has been defending Heat star Dwyane Wade for large chunks of time.

Carroll crashed to the ground after running into a Miami player attempting to set a block and appeared to land awkwardly on his wrist. He was on the ground for some time, with teammates looking on as he was attended to under the Heat basket. When Carroll got up, he headed slowly to the Toronto locker-room in obvious pain, holding his left wrist.

"It was very scary," said Raptors forward Patrick Patterson. "I didn't know what happened, I didn't really get a good look at it. But I stood up and he was still laying down on the ground.

"Hopefully he's OK. Hopefully whatever tests they do, they all come back negative and he's able to play. But yeah it was definitely scary. Of course we were thinking the worst. With JV going down, we can't afford to lose DeMarre."

X-rays were negative. Carroll did not speak to media after the game.

He had six points in 26 minutes 22 seconds. The six-foot-eight 212-pounder has had an injury-plagued season, playing just 26 regular-season games due to a knee injury.

The Heat said X-rays were inconclusive on Deng, who had four points in 24:20. An MRI is planned in Miami.

"Luol is about as tough a competitor as I've ever been around so we'll see," said Miami coach Erik Spoelstra. "I don't even want to jump to a conclusion right now."