Advertisement 8 people robbed at gunpoint in five separate holdups in New Orleans Share Shares Copy Link Copy

Eight people fell victim to armed gunmen Friday into Saturday morning in five separate robberies that were reported in different areas of New Orleans. New Orleans police said the armed robberies were reported between 10:30 a.m. Friday and 4 a.m. Saturday in areas including the Upper Ninth Ward and Gentilly. The first robbery was reported just before 10:30 a.m. in the 1100 block of Louisa Street. Police said a 32-year-old man was approached by two or three men who struck him several times with a gun. The robbers took the victim's bicycle and money before leaving. Officials said the second robbery was reported after 2 p.m. in the 5100 block of Arts Street. The victim, a 19-year-old man, was robbed at gunpoint by two people whom police said he knows. The third robbery was reported after 5:30 p.m. in the 6000 block of Wildair Drive. Detectives said two men and a woman were in a vehicle when three men surrounded them. One of the culprits took out a gun and demanded their property. Police said the victims complied and the men left in a vehicle. Over near Delgado Community College, officials said the fourth robbery was reported just after 1:30 a.m. in the 5400 block of Vicksburg Street. Two men with guns approached a 47-year-old man who was sitting on his front porch. Detectives said the man demanded the victim's belongings. The man brought both men inside his home to get his money. Once the robbers were inside, the two met met with another man and demanded his money. Both robbers left the home with items that belonged to the two men, police said. The fifth robbery was reported just after 4 a.m. in the 1800 block of Henriette Delille Street. Detectives said a 57-year-old man was approached by two men, one of whom struck him in the head with a blunt object and demanded his property. Officials said the victim complied and the two robbers left with his bicycle and other property. Additional details about the robberies have not been released. Detectives have not provided descriptions of the robbers. Anyone with information is asked to call Crimestoppers at 504-822-1111. Keep up with local news, weather and current events with the WDSU app here. Sign up for our email newsletters to get breaking news right in your inbox. Click here to sign up!