What would happen if responsible citizens stepped up to do the police’s job during the rioting that authorities in the government and media whipped up for political reasons in Ferguson? They would be shut down by the very police that idly allowed lowlife to loot and/or burn down dozens of businesses — as the Oath Keepers learned:

Oath Keepers boarded up a bunch of the storefronts and started night rotations on several rooftops. … Fearing more arsonists, Oath Keeper volunteers kept buckets of water, fire extinguishers and other nonlethal weapons on the rooftops. Some are also armed with rifles that aren’t available at Walmart and Cabela’s. The volunteers said they were well aware of the risk to life that arson can play and the legal right to stop it from happening. Group volunteers say they are confident they have helped protect property and lives since they arrived. Victor Clark, a dentist at Ferguson Dental on South Florissant Road, said he was happy to have the Oath Keepers’ free assistance. He wants to reopen his business soon. On Monday, rioters shattered the front door and window, and stole dental needles and anesthetic. Then Oath Keepers showed up out of the blue. “We gave them our keys,” he said. “We didn’t know that much about them, but we got a feeling of trust. You have to do something to protect our building.”

Someone sure does — since the money paid for this in taxes apparently all goes to wealth redistribution.

Considering that Missouri’s Democrat governor had refused to use the National Guard to defend businesses from the rioters (evidently under pressure from Obama), this was not likely to go over well with officials.

Police questioned group members early in the week and allowed them to stay. But Saturday, after media inquiries, St. Louis County police officers ordered the Oath Keepers to leave the rooftops. Threatened with arrest for operating without a license, the volunteers argued but eventually left their positions early Saturday, Rhodes said. “We are going to go back as protesters,” [Oath Keepers founder Stewart] Rhodes said Saturday afternoon.

Maybe if they throw a few Molotov cocktails through innocent people’s windows, they can get the folks in charge on their side.

Authorities didn’t want volunteers spoiling the spectacle.

On tips from Sean C, Bill T, and Stormfax. Hat tip: Conservative Refocus.