NEW DELHI: An 18-year-old rape survivor has alleged that Aam Aadmi Party MLA from Kasturba Nagar in south Delhi, Madan Lal, has been pressuring her to withdraw the case, police said on Monday. The girl has given a written complaint (accessed by TOI) to south Delhi police in this regard after which they have begun an inquiry. The MLA will soon be called for questioning, police said.The rape was reported in December last year, police said. The survivor had been allegedly accosted by the man and sexually assaulted. However, the accused later apologized and married the girl. "As the woman was only 17 at the time and she and her family members had complained to police, we initiated legal action," said a senior police officer.An FIR under sections of IPC pertaining to sexual assault, abduction and POCSO Act was registered at Kotla Mubarakpur police station. The accused was arrested following a raid at his home. He was sent to judicial custody and the police began filing the chargesheet.A month later, however, the survivor again sought help from the police saying Madan Lal, the local AAP MLA, was putting pressure on her to stop pursuing the case. In the written complaint addressed to the deputy commissioner of police, south district, she demanded a speedy probe into the matter.The police immediately sent a written reply to the survivor, informing her that police investigations into the case were complete and that the accused had been arrested and sent to jail. The girl was informed that the department had submitted a chargesheet and trial was to begun shortly.However, police said they are yet to probe the MLA's role in pressuring the victim. "As far as allegations against the local MLA are concerned, an inquiry has been initiated. If the allegations are found true, action will be taken. We will be asking him to join investigations," the senior police officer said.Madan Lal did not respond to repeated calls and text messages.He was recently in news when he alleged at a press meet that he had received a call from an "unknown number" and the person who spoke to him said he would make him talk to a "big person" and mentioned Arun Jaitley's name. Lal had also alleged he was approached by two people on behalf of Gujarat chief minister and BJP prime ministerial candidate Narendra Modi a few days ago but said he had no proof to back his allegations.