Share. Where does he get those wonderful statues? Where does he get those wonderful statues?

If you're a hardcore Batman fan with disposable income, simply collecting graphic novels and DVDs isn't enough. What better way to show your love for the Caped Crusader than assembling a collection of statues and busts depicting the hero in all his three-dimensional glory? Luckily, with Batman being as popular as he is, there's been no shortage of high-end collectibles to choose from over the years.

As part of our ongoing celebration of Batman's 75th anniversary, we've decided to spotlight the 10 coolest Batman statues of all time. But first, a few ground rules. In the interest of narrowing down the pool of candidates, we limited our selections to statues and busts, not action figures, LEGO sets, and so forth. We also limited our choices to statues that feature Batman himself in some capacity, so statues featuring just characters like Joker, Catwoman, Batgirl, etc. were out of the running. And finally, this list includes only products that have been released and are officially licensed by DC.

With that in mind, check out our picks for the greatest Batman statues, and let us know what your favorites are in the comments section below.

10 Batman: The Animated Series - Batman Maquette

For all that Batman: The Animated Series is lauded as being one of the greatest (if not the greatest) interpretations of Batman, there have been surprisingly few collectibles geared towards capturing Bruce Timm's distinctive art style. Even fewer have been based on Timm's original character designs rather than the New Batman Adventures redesigns.

If you want a statue depicting Batman in all his 1992-era animated glory, look no further than this maquette from DC's Classic Animation Series line. The pose is a little plain, but that's kind of the point of a maquette. What matters is that Timm's design has been translated perfectly to 3D. This Batman is stoic, imposing, and a fitting homage to such a great animated series. Good luck finding one for anywhere close to the original price, though.

9 Batman: Black & White by Jock Statue

DC's Batman: Black and White line is dedicated to bringing various artistic interpretations of Batman to life with a unique, monotone approach. The statues are fairly small (roughly the same scale as DC's action figures), but they're also a heck of a lot cheaper than most other Batman collectibles.

Easily one of DC's finest efforts so far has been the Jock statue, based on the artist's collaboration with Scott Snyder for the "Black Mirror" storyline. The dynamic pose is a far cry from the usual crop of statues depicting Batman looming or getting ready to throw a Batarang. With the billowing cape and twisted grappling cable, there's a real sense of motion to this piece. It has a presence that goes above and beyond most of the B&W pieces. And it's always nice to see a statue depicting Dick Grayson as Batman for a change.

8 Hush: Batman and Catwoman Kiss Statue

Batman statues based on Jim Lee's artwork are nothing new at this point. But this most recent Hush statue is easily one of the best and most faithful to Lee's art. The statue is closely based on Lee's splash image depicting Batman and Catwoman's passionate kiss. Thanks to Tim Bruckner's top-notch sculpting, every fold of Batman's cape and bulge of his muscle has been faithfully translated to 3D form. Even the billowing fog of the Gotham night has been included.

It's tough to understand just how impressive this statue looks until you see it in person. The enormous base and the fact that you're essentially getting two statues in one help make the $250 price tag more palatable.

7 Detective Comics #38: Batman and Robin Statue

All of our picks so far have been devoted to more contemporary interpretations of Batman, but there have been some great retro-style statues as well. Perhaps none is better than this piece, which adapts the iconic cover to Detective Comics #38 and celebrates Robin's very first appearance.

In some ways, it's much more difficult to translate the work of Golden Age artists to 3D than it is more modern creators like Jim Lee, but Tim Bruckner delivered another winner with this sculpt. Bob Kane's cover is elegantly brought to life, and the image of Robin leaping onto the stage offers a striking design to add to your Batman collection. The various Robins aren't terribly well represented in statue form, but at least the Dynamic Duo have this piece to celebrate their partnership.

6 The Dark Knight Returns: Call to Arms Statue

As you might expect, several companies focused a lot of attention on The Dark Knight Returns-themed collectibles in 2012 and 2013 with the release of the two-part animated movie. But of all those pieces, it's hard to top DC's Call to Arms statue for presence and sheer novelty. How many other statues depict Batman atop a majestic steed?

The Call to Arms statue is easily one of the best attempts at capturing Frank Miller's distinctive art style. This Batman is grim, gritty, and bulging with muscle and sinew. But it's the horse that takes the piece to another level. It gives the piece mass, making it easily one of DC's larger Batman statues. And it tells a story of Batman charging into battle and rallying an army to save a powerless Gotham City.