Tom Hiddleston was JUST ABOUT to give us the lowdown on what REALLY happened between him and Taylor swift, but whaaaat?? Nicole Kidman cut him off! Ok, so that may have been an over exaggeration on the content of the interview. Sadly, Tom was not about to reveal inside info on Hiddleswift, but Nicole DID really hijack Tom’s interview. So, Tom was really talking to the Golden Globes about his character in ‘The Night Manager.’ But right behind him, Nicole Kidman and her husband Keith Urban were greeting other stars on the red carpet. That’s when the actress came over and took over the interview. Apparently, she wanted Tom to be DONE. Tom tried to play off the awkward moment by actually interviewing Nicole, who looked slightly embarrassed by what she’d just done. But the actress did reveal why she had interrupted the interview. Well, we certainly enjoyed it. Did you? Let us know below.

NICOLE Kidman displayed “bizarre” and “loose” behaviour at the Golden Globes, interrupting interviews and “shooing away” a cocktail waitress, according to a new report.

Woman’s Day magazine claims the Australian actress left “some observers wondering whether she’d had a few too many pre-show wines.”

The January 8 event began with the Lion actress interrupting British actor Tom Hiddleston’s red carpet interview to say she was having fun.

“Sorry to crash. I’m so happy to be here and I’m determined to have fun. That’s why I came here and did that,” she laughed.

At an after-party, the magazine reports she “shooed away” a cocktail waitress and “constantly ushered over” waiters with pizza.

The magazine claims the 49-year-old star dropped crumbs on her husband, Keith Urban.

The report comes after Kidman drew outrage and praise for saying Americans should support US President-elect Donald Trump.

She later clarified that her comments were merely a statement of her belief in democracy, not an endorsement of the incoming president.

The Hours actress was born in Hawaii to Australian parents and holds dual citizenship in Australia and the US.