Footbrawl Playground is a Physics Playground and in fact the most pointless Game in the world. So I came up for the Idea of "Footbrawl Playground". Its actually just a Physics Playground where you can goof around with a Friend, spawn NPCS, Place Traps and some more stuff. Don't expect a Game of the year but rather have 5 minutes of fun without thinking too much.

If you wanna know more about the current status of the Game, Visit my Blog or follow me on twitter.



Decide if you wanna play a round of Football...

...or just try to be the nicest Stuntman in the world!

you are able to place all traps freely AND it has Local Multiplayer (Keyboard only for now)

... or play a round of car soccer like in this other car soccer Game... i forgot the name...

Fully customizable Physics Playground

Drivable Cars

Low Gravity Mode

Slow Motion Mode

Car Soccer

Local Multiplayer for 4 Players

Placeable Traps like Bounchers Human Pinball Explosive Barrles Ramps Spinner you want more? looking forward to new requests!

Basic Soccer Mode

Spawn as much NPCs and Cars as you want and enjoy the madness

Gamepad Support

Multitrack Camera (so that all players are always on screen)





Minimum:

OS: Windows Vista / Windows 7 or newer

Processor: 2.4GHz Dual Core

Memory: 4 GB RAM

Graphics: 512 MB NVIDIA GeForce 9800 / ATI Radeon HD 2600 XT

DirectX: Version 10

Storage: 2 GB available space

Recommended:



OS: Windows Vista / Windows 7 or newer

Processor: 2.4GHz Dual Core

Memory: 4 GB RAM

Graphics: 1 GB NVIDIA 460 / AMD Radeon 5870

DirectX: Version 11

Storage: 2 GB available space

please read this manual before you start playing





Website: playground.pixelpizza.de

twitter: https://twitter.com/Der_Kevin

facebook: phttps://www.facebook.com/Footbrawl

subreddit: https://www.reddit.com/r/Footbrawl/

Newsletter: phttp://eepurl.com/b1lUV9





All paying customers of Footbrawl playground on itch.io can obtain a steam key when they click the request key button on their purchase page!

You can also do this if you if you bought the Game in the past!



