Kingston, Jamaica - Waterhouse FC (Jamaica), Puerto Rico Bayamon FC (Puerto Rico), and Alpha United (Guyana) will be the Caribbean Football Union (CFU) representatives at the upcoming 2014/2015 CONCACAF Champions League.

The decision was taken by the CFU Executive Committee after consultation with CONCACAF officials and the three (3) Group Winners.

Damien E. Hughes, CFU General Secretary explained that the decision was taken after the Fédération Haïtienne de Football failed to confirm of Valencia F.C (Haiti) as an active member of the Federation. The fallout between the Club and the Haitian Federation has been ongoing for some time and has had the intervention of FIFA, CONCACAF and CFU without successful resolution.

“While we had an outstanding qualifying round of the tournament, we were excited by the prospects of inviting last year’s best Caribbean performer at the CONCACAF Champions League, Valencia FC, to take their predetermined final four spot when we were informed that the Club remains at odds with its National Federation.

“A decision of principle, interpretation of the tournament rules, and fiscal prudence were the factors that went into the final decision. With three (3) spots available and three (3) group winners determined, it did not make practical sense to put the teams through further expense that they could apply at the CONCACAF level since Valencia could not participate. “This decision was supported and endorsed by CONCACAF, confirmed Hughes”

The head of the CFU Secretariat explained that while the three (3) Clubs who have already qualified from their respective groups, as group winners will advance to the CONCACAF Champions League; their participation is still subject to them meeting the minimum standards and fulfilling the regulatory requirements of participation as mandated by CONCACAF. If any of the Clubs fail to meet the standards, then Centro Dominguito (Curacao) as the best overall second place team will take their place at the CONCACAF Champions League.

The CFU extends congratulations to all three (3) Clubs and wishes them success as they fly the flag of the CFU proudly in their endeavors to win this prestigious tournament.

The CFU Club Championship Cup, is the CFU’s official qualifying tournament for the 2014/2015 CONCACAF Champions League from which teams are eligible to qualify for the FIFA Club World Cup.