MANILA, Philippines – Five more persons suspected of involvement in the illegal drug trade were killed in separate incidents across the country in the past two days, three of them by suspected vigilantes.

Esperdio Blaza, 30, a resident of Barangay Mudeng in La Paz, Abra, was driving his motorcycle on his way to Bangued when unidentified motorcycle-riding men fired at him yesterday morning.

The La Paz police said Blaza was on their drug watchlist.

In Butuan City, graphic artist Karl Torredes, 32, was gunned down near his shop in Barangay Diego Silang on Monday.

Senior Inspector Paul Padin said the fatality was charged with violation of the Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act for allegedly selling shabu.

In Bulacan, Alvino Lucino was walking near his house in Barangay Patubig in Marilao town on Monday when he was shot. A placard identifying him as a pusher was found near his body.

Regie Gonzales reportedly shot it out with police operatives in Barangay 4 in Tanauan City, Batangas at around 5:45 a.m. yesterday.

A caliber .45 pistol and five sachets of shabu were allegedly recovered from the fatality.

In Laguna, Rudy Panlague, 40, alias Rudy, drew his gun when he sensed that he had sold shabu to undercover agents in Barangay Poblacion in San Pedro City on Monday night, said Superintendent Chitadel Gaoiran, Calabarzon (Cavite, Laguna, Batangas, Rizal, Quezon) police spokesperson.

‘High-value’ drug pushers

Meanwhile, Michael Serna, 34; Jieson Gaoat, 38, and Redentor Carillo, 49, were arrested in stings in Barangay Pug-os in Cabugao, Ilocos Sur; Poblacion, Sta. Maria and Laoag, Ilocos Norte, respectively, on Monday.

The suspects are “high-value” drug pushers in the Ilocos region, police said.

Also on Monday in Camarines Sur, Richard Bandin, 33, was nabbed in Barangay San Roque in Pili town and Kier Payra in Barangay Talojongon, in Virac.

The suspects are on the drug watchlist of the police in their respective areas.

In Rizal, police said 13 drug suspects did not resist arrest in simultaneous raids on Barangays Wawa, Pinagkamaligan, Tandang Kutyo and Kay Buto in Tanay town.

Two others caught sniffing shabu were collared in Baragay San Jose in Rodriguez, Rizal. – Artemio Dumlao, Ric Sapnu, Ben Serrano, Celso Amo, Raymund Catindig, Non Alquitran, Ed Amoroso