Last week we ran a list of Coachella bands headed to Phoenix around the festival's dates. Well, since then the list has grown, including big name acts like Phoenix, The Postal Service, and Tegan and Sara. So allow us to fill you in with a comprehensive list of Coachella acts headed to the Valley of the Sun.

See also:

-Stop Hating on the 2013 Coachella Lineup -Didn't Buy A Coachella Pass in Time? Good Thing a Bunch of Coachella Bands Are Coming to Phoenix

Continue Reading

Hanni El Khatib: On Friday, March 8, L.A.-based garage hellion Hanni El-Khatib will join Cold War Kids, Mergence, In the Valley, Diners, Wooden Indian, Stan Devereux and the Funky Suns, and more at New Times' Carnaval Eléctrico festival at Crescent Ballroom.

Airborne Toxic Event: Critics have always been savage to this band -- but the L.A.-based alt-rockers have a way with their fans. The band comes to Marquee Theatre in Tempe on Monday, April 1.

Dirtyphonics: French EDM duo Dirtyphonics -- who've worked with Skrillex and Marilyn Manson -- will headline a set at the Monarch Theatre in downtown Phoenix on Saturday, April 6.

Phoenix: Coachella mainstagers Phoenix are coming to Tempe; the French indie rockers play Monday, April 8, at Marquee Theatre.

Beach House: Mentioning this doesn't do that much good, as the dream pop band's Tuesday, April 9, show at Crescent Ballroom already has sold out, but it would be much easier to buy a ticket for this show than to deal with shady folks selling Coachella wristbands.

Sigur Ros: This cinematic Icelandic band will swing by Comerica Theatre on Friday, April 12, and the band's orchestral post-rock sounds amazing in concert. Get on it.

Monday, April 15: Coachella-Related Concert Onslaught Day 2013: Unless you're at the festival, you really have no excuse for not going to a show on this day. The xx will be at Marquee Theatre; Poliça will be at The Rhythm Room; and Local Natives will be at Rialto Theatre in Tucson (a much less strenuous road trip than the one to Indio).

Alex Clare: If you're not burned out on "Too Close" yet, you can see this dubstep/soul musician perform at Marquee Theatre on Tuesday, April 16.

Portugal. The Man: These indie rockers always have a big draw. Check out Glenn BurnSilver's review of the band's show last year ("The band may make great records in the studio, but live, they're even better," writes BurnSilver). The band will play at the Marquee Theatre on April 17, and we can't guarantee that it won't sell out. They'll be joined by Lord Huron, also scheduled to appear at Coachella.

Rodriguez: If this singer/songwriter's name doesn't ring a bell, the documentary Searching for Sugar Man may turn you into a fan. The singer will be performing at the gorgeous Orpheum Theatre on Thursday, April 18, and will perform in Tucson the following day.

The Postal Service: Give Up, Ben Gibbard and Jimmy Tamborello's team- up LP as the Postal Service, turns 10 this year, and the long-inactive duo is getting back together to celebrate (and push copies of Sub Pop's upcoming deluxe edition). Their stop at Coachella comes in addition to a local date, on Thursday, April 18, at Comerica Theatre . The Gaslight Anthem: These blue-collar Jersey punks were a surprising addition to the Coachella lineup, and they always put on a fantastic show. We highly recommend seeing them at Marquee Theatre on Tuesday, April 23, for a dose of Springsteen-influenced rock.

Father John Misty: The kooky former drummer of Fleet Foxes will return to the Valley a couple of weeks after Coachella, appearing at Crescent Ballroom on Thursday, May 4.

Tegan and Sara: You have to wait a little bit to catch Tegan and Sara in Phoenix. They perform in Tucson on Sunday, April 14, but it won't be until Tuesday, September 10, that they grace the Valley at Comerica Theatre. It'll be worth the wait though -- they'll be opening for fun., fronted by Arizona's favorite son and hitmaker, Nate Ruess.

That's all we know for now. We have our fingers crossed for Lou Reed, Yeah Yeah Yeahs, Modest Mouse, Grizzly Bear, Knife Party, Franz Ferdinand, Violent Femmes, Vampire Weekend, Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds, Wu-Tang Clan, and more to schedule dates in Arizona.

Writeups by Melissa Fossum and Jason P. Woodbury

See also:

-Stop Hating on the 2013 Coachella Lineup -Didn't Buy A Coachella Pass in Time? Good Thing a Bunch of Coachella Bands Are Coming to Phoenix

Follow us on Twitter and friend us on Facebook