Vegan Parmesan Cheese enhances so many dishes. There are only four ingredients and it only takes about 5 mins. Sprinkle it on pasta, soups, salads and more.

How to Make Vegan Parmesan Cheese is a talent that can be yours in minutes. It enhances so many dishes as I am sure you can remember how regular parmesan cheese did in the old days. This recipe is so simple yet so useful.

There are only four ingredients and is complete in about 5 minutes. You can sprinkle it on, at least, pasta and soups. I love sprinkling quite a lot of it into my salads.

That sounds good! I have to have a salad tomorrow.

This post contains affiliate links. Read my disclosure policy here.

Go ahead and double or triple the recipe if you like. It freezes so well you can freeze a larger quantity and take out a quarter of a cup at a time. It’ll be ready to go immediately.

Just today I sprinkled some in my chickpea wrap. It really added a delicious extra flavor and texture.

You’ll find you can go through it vegan parmesan cheese very quickly. Thank goodness it’s so simple to make.

Want to try this Homemade Parmesan Cheese? PIN IT to your Vegan or Vegan Cheese Board to save for later! Find me on Pinterest for more great recipes!

My niece was over last week and made a batch with walnuts. That was a bit of a stronger flavor but it certainly has it’s place. I’m thinking chili.

Chili with parmesan on top is always a good thing. How about on avocado and Two Bean Camp Chili? So so good!

If you like walnuts don’t be afraid to try them as a substitute.

Cashews are traditional though as they come closer to dairy parmesan cheese in flavor. Nutritional yeast and other spices are balanced just right. You’ll be glad you made a batch.

I would love to hear how you would use vegan parmesan cheese. Leave a comment below so I can make notes. You aren’t really supposed to eat it off a spoon but it’s okay with me..

Let’s Get Connected! Facebook | Pinterest | Instagram | Bloglovin

Print 5 from 6 votes How to Make Vegan Parmesan Cheese Vegan Parmesan Cheese enhances so many dishes. Sprinkle it on pasta, soups, salads and more. Prep Time 5 minutes Total Time 5 minutes Servings 12 Ounces Calories 63 kcal Author Ginny McMeans Ingredients 1 cup cashews raw

1/4 cup nutritional yeast

1/2 teaspoon garlic powder

1/2 teaspoon onion powder

1/2 teaspoon sea salt Instructions Add all of the ingredients to a food processor.

Pulse until a fine crumb mixture forms. Literally seconds.

Use in just about any savory dish you can think of. Nutrition Nutrition Facts How to Make Vegan Parmesan Cheese Amount Per Serving (1 Ounce) Calories 63 Calories from Fat 36 % Daily Value* Total Fat 4g 6% Sodium 98mg 4% Potassium 89mg 3% Total Carbohydrates 3g 1% Protein 2g 4% Calcium 0.4% Iron 4.3% * Percent Daily Values are based on a 2000 calorie diet.

Keep in the refrigerator for about a month or keep in the freezer in a freezer container for up to 12 months.

Hey! Here are a couple more recipes that love to use vegan parmesan cheese.

The Best Creamy Mushroom Soup and Fantastic Stuffed Mushrooms!

Now just to remind you of a great pantry addition.