BRITISH PRIME MINISTER Theresa May has raised the country’s terror threat level from severe to critical.

Critical is the highest level possible in the UK and means that an attack is “expected imminently”.

The threat level is decided by the Joint Terrorism Analysis Centre (JTAC). The last time it reached critical was in 2007, having been severe since 2014.

Prime Minister Theresa May said that the decision had been made following investigations today.

“It has now been concluded that the threat levels should be increased for the time being.

“This means that [the JTAC's] assessment is not only that an attack is highly likely, but that another attack is imminent

“It is a possibility we cannot ignore that there is a wider group of individuals linked to this attack.”

May added that military personnel will be deployed to Britain’s streets to support armed police officers under Operation Tempora.

Armed personnel will be visible at big events such as concerts and sporting events, she said.

Attack

Source: PA Wire/PA Images

The move comes as 22 people were confirmed dead after last night’s suicide bomb attack on an Ariana Grande concert in Manchester.

Manchester police identified the suspect behind the attack as 22-year-old Salman Abedi.

Police staged an armed raid on a Manchester address believed to be where Abedi lived, carrying out a controlled explosion to gain entry after arresting a 23-year-old man earlier Tuesday in connection with the attack.

“A single terrorist detonated his improvised explosive device near one of the exits of the venue, deliberately choosing the time and place to cause maximum carnage and to kill and injure indiscriminately,” May said after an emergency ministerial meeting.

The attack was the deadliest in Britain since July 7, 2005 when four suicide bombers inspired by Al-Qaeda attacked London’s transport system during rush hour, killing 52 people and wounding 700 more.

The Islamic State group has claimed responsibility for the attack.