About

Handle Business Tax Like (And Without) A CPA

Have you ever had a skill that’s naturally easy for you, but impossible to others?

The type of skill that you probably don't even notice, until somebody says something.

And no, I'm not talking about the "Not everybody has your metabolism..." skill, I'm talking about other things...

Like fun skills, something similar to "Most Consecutive Pogo-Stick Jumps" (or hops, whatever they're called).

It's a fun skill to have, and a fun skill to show - but it's not a skill that I'd consider "needed"....just take that the good way, if you have this skill - you're unique.

But no matter how fun it is, it's never "needed" unless it's also a useful skill.

And when I say useful skill, I mean something that does everybody good - like Designing Responsive Websites.

You increase your client's sales and you get paid well for it - I'd say that's a good skill.

And it really could be anything, no need to think of it as a Nobel Peace Prize-Winning Skill, either - think of something similar to website design, or Sales Copywriting, or SEO, or - okay...you get the hint.

Anyway, these two things have a lot of differences, but they also have a few things in common…

Like how they help people, or how most people carry these skills - just never use them...

And that last sentence ties in with my message for two different reasons

The first reason is how difficult things are for anybody who's considered self-employed. Trust me, I’ve seen every angle.

Starting with my role as a Commercial Loan Officer, a role that allowed me to work with Small Business Owners everyday.

I enjoyed working with small business owners, but at the same time - I noticed how difficult it was for most of them.

And they were all extremely smart, worked hard, and had money - that was the crazy part.

I know mistakes are inevitable for entrepreneurs, but that's on the business side of things.

A lot of mistakes were happening on the legal (including tax) side of things - and that's the side of things where you really don't want to have mistakes.

Those tend to do a little more damage.

But there's not a lot of resources out there and Freelancing doesn't bring in enough cash to cover Professional Fees, so that takes us back to our original problem...lack of information - for every new entrepreneur.

Sure, you could go to college and get your MBA - but that doesn’t teach you core concepts of business.

Trust me, I’ve been there (MBA-Tax).....

Don’t get me wrong, I’m not saying it didn’t help in one way, shape or form - I’m just saying it doesn’t teach you what you really need to know... in the beginning stages.

And I continued to notice this as I entered the Tax field, preparing tax returns for business owners (including Freelancers, Consultant, Solopreneur, Small Business)...most of them doing it for the first or second time.

The veteran business owners usually had a good handle on things, but it always scared me when I saw someone who'd been in business for less than 5 years. They're the most prone to a "tax surprise" - and it's never fun to deliver these surprises.

Each surprise was different, but to give you some insight on them, they all said the same thing - "I had no idea, I’ve looked everywhere and I didn’t see that - I can't pay that much for tax right now..”.

Which leads me to the second reason, my random skill that’s always been easy for me.

I don’t know who I pissed off or why I was born with this skill, but I’ve always been good at Tax.

It’s not a fun skill to have, but as I’ve learned over the years - it’s important to know.

(I’m sure you’ve heard the Ben Franklin quote about death and taxes)

And that’s where the irony starts to come in. I’ve always had this skill, and I've always loved explaining it to Business Owners - but I’ve never liked doing the actual returns (even though I do like breaking them down and verifying them).

I think that’s where my extroverted personality clashes with my odd number skill - but in all honesty, it really works out great.

I now understand how to talk tax in the terms (and see through the lens) of an entrepreneur - that’s helped me in a lot of ways.

Like creating a system that allows entrepreneurs to handle their own tax - using processes and today's technology...ones that they already use (and know).

They might not understand the tax code in full and they won’t talk like a CPA - but they get the same results.

And that helps them avoid tax surprises or large professional fees (in the early years anyway).

So where are my going with this?

Well finally, after years of advice from family and friends - I finally decided to take the leap.

Helping Entrepreneurs Tackle Tax

The leap started with passing the entire IRS Enrolled Agent Exam after 6 days of studying - then receiving the ability to represent clients (in IRS Tax Audits) a few weeks later.

That led to the Consulting business. I did a few different things, but they all revolved around helping entrepreneurs with tax. And when I say help, I mean cleaning up a mess.

A mess created by the lack of information I talked about a few minutes ago, the same mess that almost forced a client to pay $20,000 on income...that wasn't even income.

A lot of the mess was from a misunderstanding - like doing something that you wouldn't consider income...even though you’re technically making a profit from it.

That story comes from one of my clients who received a large bill from the IRS - referencing $21,000 of unreported income that PayPal sent them.

This amount took place over 3 years, but he also had roughly $20,000 of expenses (that could offset this income)... over the same 3 years.

He clearly wasn't trying to avoid the tax bill, he just didn’t think about it as income.

It was a hobby (custom golf club grips....little profit), so he didn’t see it as anything else.... until he had to pay someone to help him out of a serious tax debt.

And I’m glad he called us, but it made me wonder how many others have been in that situation?

Knowing that help is too expensive, so they decide to risk it - spending way more on tax than they need to?

Helping More Entrepreneurs Tackle Tax

It sounds crazy, but it happens all the time. And after seeing this too many times, I've finally decided to scale up - so I can help more Entrepreneurs avoid this situation.

After months of training...learning...and testing - I’ve finally found out how:

Through an Online Course that’s designed to teach Entrepreneurs - Mainly Freelancers, Consultants, Solopreneurs, and Small Business Owners - how to handle their tax (with systems and processes) and avoid surprises.

The course will continue to grow over the years and updates will be made in different “launches”.

These different launches will add more items like videos, templates, updated tax changes, etc. - but the basics will always be there (and updated annually).

These basics include:

Federal Income Tax For Business...(How It Works/Impacts You)

State Income Tax For Business

Business Entities, and Which One Is Best For You

Other Areas of Tax (If applicable)

Payroll Tax

Estimated Payments

How to Report Your Revenue and Expenses

Sales Tax

Setting up a system that allows you to file your own taxes like a Tax professional, even if you’ve never done them before

And more to come as it continues to grow (i.e. taped coaching sessions)

Always Growing With Member Feedback/Questions

For the beginning stages, I’ve decided to sell this course at a one-time price.

I’ll probably do this again during the second launch, but after the third launch - it’ll change over to subscription pricing.

There’s a few different reasons for that, but it’s mainly a thank you to the initial members who helped get legs under the community....

And even more important, helping more entrepreneurs with tax - a very important topic as the “gig economy” continues to get larger.

That’s why their one-time price is also a lifetime membership - an amazing resource that'll help for many years.

And today, I’m offering that membership to you as a reward for backing this course - for the one-time pledge of 75.

Does this sound like a good course to you?

If so, please help me out by using the options on the right-hand side of this page (towards the top).



Anything helps, thanks for reading!