Findings on Using Azilect (Rasagiline) as an Add-On Therapy A Phase 3 Japanese trial has found that adding Azilect (rasagiline) to levodopa is safe, and over the course of a year improved motor function in those with Parkinson’s disease with off periods. The Journal of Neural Transmission published the results …

Acorda Therapeutics Announces FDA Approval of INBRIJA™ (levodopa inhalation powder) (December 21, 2018) Acorda Therapeutics, Inc. has announced that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved INBRIJA™ for intermittent treatment of OFF episodes in people with Parkinson’s disease who are treated with carbidopa/levodopa. INBRIJA is expected to be commer …

Join The Parkinson Alliance at Rock Steady Boxing of South Brunswick’s Family Appreciation Day on Monday, December 10, 2018, in Kingston, NJ Rock Steady Boxing of South Brunswick will have a Family Appreciation Day on Monday, December 10, 2018, at 11:45 am to 2 pm, at the Retro Fitness of Kingston, in Kingston, NJ. The Parkinson Alliance will be there; please join us! Participate with a fam …

The Parkinson Alliance is a Charity Partner of the 29th Annual Bucks County Roadrunners Thanksgiving Day Five-Miler & One-Mile Fun Run on Thursday, November 22, 2018 The 29th Annual Customers Bank Bucks County Roadrunners (BCRR) Thanksgiving Day Five-Miler & One-Mile Fun Run in Langhorne, PA, will be held on Thursday, November 22, 2018. The Parkinson Alliance is proud to be a Charity Partner of this race, along …

Dance for Parkinson’s – Open House (November 11, 2018) Dance for Parkinson’s is for people with Parkinson’s Disease and their caregivers. Each class has live music and creates a warm sanctuary for movement exploration, and a social atmosphere to support artistic venture. The Parkinson A …

Axovant Announced Administration of AXO-Lenti-PD, A Novel Gene Therapy for Patient’s with Parkinson’s Disease, to First Patient in Clinical Study October 25, 2018 — Axovant announced that the first patient in a clinical study was administered dosing of AXO-Lenti-PD, which is an investigational gene therapy to treat Parkinson’s disease, that enables the expression of a set of three critical enzym …

“Milestone Moment” as LRRK2 inhibitor enters human testing October 25, 2018 — At the Michael J. Fox Foundation’s annual scientific conference, data was presented from a Phase I LRRK2 trial. The gene that makes the LRRK2 protein is the most common genetic cause of Parkinson’s. Described as a “Milestone Momen …

NYC Area: Free LSVT-LOUD Educational Seminar on December 1 October 25, 2018 — Those with PD, their families, friends, caregivers and healthcare professionals are invited to learn about LSVT-BIG, an evidence-based and effective program for those with PD seeking to improve movement, balance, walking and more. …

NYC Area: Free LSVT-LOUD Educational Seminar on November 30 October 25, 2018 — Those with PD, their families, friends, caregivers and healthcare professionals are invited to learn about LSVT-LOUD, an evidence-based and effective program for those with PD. Enjoy a FREE one-hour lecture, following which individ …