CLOSE IndyStar IU Insider Zach Osterman discusses the Hoosiers' choice of Archie Miller as the program's new men's basketball coach. Matthew Glenesk / IndyStar

New IU coach Archie Miller reached out to Georgia guard Al Durham less than 24 hours on the job. (Photo: Marvin Gentry-USA TODAY Sports)

On the job less than 24 hours, new IU basketball coach Archie Miller is already reaching out to 2017 signees in an effort to keep Tom Crean's last recruiting class intact.

Al Durham Sr., father of IU recruit Al Durham, said Miller reached out Saturday.

"Al is a priority," Durham Sr. said. "(Miller) definitely wants him. He thinks he fits into his system well."

Following Crean's dismissal, Durham asked IU for a release from his national letter of intent. Pennsylvania forward Clifton Moore, another member of the 2017 class, also asked for his release last week.

Durham Sr. said Miller plans to visit the family "as quickly as he can talk to us face-to-face, which is good."

• DOYEL: Fred Glass knocks it out of the park with Archie Miller hire

• INSIDER: Archie Miller 'a great hire, great for the state'

As of Sunday, that visit has not been officially scheduled.

Durham, a three-star combo guard from Wilburn (Ga.) Berkmar, committed to the Hoosiers in October of 2015 — the first member of IU's 2017 class. And he may wind up in Bloomington still.

"I'm glad he reached out immediately," Durham Sr. said. "Al likes Indiana, loves Indiana. He was coming for Tom Crean, but it's Indiana. Just have to do what's best for the kid and make sure he's in the right situation."

A third member of IU's recruiting class, Justin Smith out of Lincolnshire (Ill.), is not believed to have requested out of his letter of intent.

NEWSLETTERS Get the IndyStar Motor Sports newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong The latest news in IndyCar and the world of motor sports. Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-888-357-7827. Delivery: Sun - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for IndyStar Motor Sports Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Miller will be introduced as IU's new head coach at a 3 p.m., Monday news conference.

• MORE:'No doubt' Archie Miller will make in-state recruiting a priority

• MORE: 5 things to know about Archie Miller