Everything is Hostile has been updated to version 2.4c

Every mod in the pack has been updated to the latest version

pack now runs on forge 1558

We are now including FTBUtils for land claiming and admin tools

The return of chromaticraft!

foresty 4.0 updates, lots of new stuff here

binnies removed (for now until he updates)

HQM upgraded to 4.4.4, required all new reward bags

new recipes including Extreme crafting

harder difficulty settings

remove geostrata



New mods:

Chromaticraft

deadly world as well, silverfish turned waaay down.

gadomancy

Agricraft

specialAI

Fragile Torches

Loginsheild

FTBUTils

Avaritia (ExtremeCrafting)

Added looking Glass util for live render of your mystcraft portals!

Runic Dungeons mod added

What are We looking at Mod







Our own custom BBTweaks mod has been added to the pack. This adds the option for an ingame currency system for use with the tradebooths. the /bb command will grant breakbit daily which can optionally be configured to be used as fuel for chunkloading.



In addition BBtweaks disabled the Drill of the dead in favor of a new Ritual of Culling. Ritual of Culling works similar to Drill of the dead but it "culls the weak". It will not kill enemies that are buffed with potion effects such as those spawned on cursed earth, UNLESS you empower the ritual with magicales.



It also adds the new ritual Nature's Leech which will consume trees, grass, flowers in a radius around the altar to create blood. It's slower than the drill but much less costly to get up and running helping to transition from early to mid game bloodmagic.



Orechid and blood magic meteros have been buffed with new oregen and radius increases respectively.



New oregen changes to allow for more rewarding manual mining.



Further balance tweaks within recipes and all dungeon loot completely revamped to be more rewarding, no more pieces of bread and string in your end strongholds!



Big trees world generation has been tweaked to be less dense and to allow for generation of BOP trees



As always more to come, please report any issues on our github tracker https://github.com/breakinblocks/everything-is-hostile/issues





this pack now includes Fastcraft, a mod made by player, this mod is designed to improve many aspects of game-play. Some mod developers may not accept errors with this mod installed, please test them again with out Fastcraft in you instance. More information can be found here - http://forum.industrial-craft.net/index.php?page=Thread&threadID=10820

