After making its presence felt in the U.S. with its affordable, unlocked handsets, Florida based mobile phone company BLU is entering the Indian market. BLU has started off its Indian adventure with the launch of two new Windows Phone handsets in the country, a press release issued by the company earlier today said. The two models the company unveiled today are the BLU Win JR LTE and BLU Win HD LTE. Both these handsets will be sold through Amazon.in, as well as through Microsoft retail points across India, the release stated. BLU has also set up a new office in the northern Indian city of Gurgaon for its nationwide operations. These phones were however already available on various stores in India since the past few months.

“We are extremely excited about building our brand in India. We believe that the Indian consumer is very savvy and knows what he wants. We are committed to developing aspirational products in a price range that will make them attainable” said Samuel Ohev-Zion, CEO of BLU Products. “BLU aims to be a major player in the Indian mobile market,” he added.

Let us delve in to the technical specifications of the phones now, shall we? We will start off with the BLU Win JR LTE

BLU Win JR LTE

The BLU Win JR is an affordable Windows phone powered device that has been priced at Rs.5,999. It is powered by the 64-bit Qualcomm Snapdragon 410 chipset that runs at 1.2 Ghz. A compact device aimed ay entry level users, the BLU Win JR features a 4.5-inch FWVGA (845 X 480) display. It has 8GB of internal memory and 1GB of RAM. The phone also supports memory expansion using microSD cards of up to 64GB. Like other phones in its price range, the BLU Win JR LTE is also a dual SIM handset that supports 4G LTE networks. The phone supports plenty of connectivity options, including Bluetooth and Wi-Fi, and boasts a 2000 mAh battery. TheBLU Win JR runs Windows Phone 8.1 out-of-the-box but will be upgraded to Windows 10 soon, the company confirmed. BLU has also chosen to tread the path chosen Nokia and Microsoft and offers the the phone in plenty of color options. TheBLU Win JR gets a 5 megapixel main camera with LED flash and a VGA front camera for selfies and video calling. The phone is currently available for purchase from Amazon.in for the aforementioned price of Rs.5,999 which puts it in direct competition with several affordable Windows Phone devices from Microsoft themselves.

Next up, we talk about the…

BLU Win HD LTE

The BLU Win HD LTE, as you might have guessed by now, is the more premium of the two handsets announced today by BLU. This phone however is powered by the same Qualcomm Snapdragon chipset as the BLU Win JR but has a better display and a more premium design. The BLU Win HD gets what the company says a “metal finishing, state of the art soft touch feel, and precision cross-hatched patterns on the side keys”. It also boasts of a 2.5mm thin bezel. Other changes include the fact that the display size has been increased to 5-inches on this device. The camera also sees an upgrade with the BLU Win HD getting an 8 megapixel main camera and a 2 megapixel front camera for all the selfie addicts out there. The BLU Win HD LTE gets 8GB of internal storage – upgradeable to 64GB using microSD cards. like its more affordable sibling, the BLU Win HD also manages with just 1GB of RAM, which could be enough considering the fact that the phone runs the resource friendly Windows Phone 8.1 out-of-the-box. That said, BLU has confirmed that the BLU Win HD, too, would be receiving an official upgrade to Windows 10. The BLU Win HD has been priced at Rs.7,999 and is available on Amazon.in.

BLU has also added that, starting in November, they also plan to roll out an array of Android powered phones in the country. It would be interesting to see if they would launch the BLU Pure XL in India which is nothing but a re-branded Gionee Elife E8 that we talked about a few days ago.

[Images Via BLU]