0

Wherever this article finds you within your binging of Marvel’s Jessica Jones on Netflix, part of you might be wondering just where all the news is for one of the comic book company’s other Defenders, Iron Fist. The last time we reported on any news out of the Living Weapon’s camp, it was to lump it together with the loose schedule of Marvel’s other TV series. When Krysten Ritter was announced as Jessica Jones, with Mike Colter set to play Luke cage on Jessica Jones before starring in his own series, fans were left wondering if Iron Fist was still in the works at all.

Thanks to an interview with Marvel Television chief Jeph Loeb, CBR got some good intel on why the TV production wing has kept quiet on Iron Fist and when fans might see their first solid news about the series. While it is still some time away – Jessica Jones just debuted today and we have a full Luke Cage series to look forward to in addition to the second season of Daredevil – Iron Fist provides the last necessary piece of the puzzle that will be Marvel TV’s Defenders series.

So even though there was a rumor that Iron Fist was being scrapped/shelved/delayed, or what have you, simply because things were quiet on the news front, Loeb confirms that this is not the case:

“There was a lot of speculation about what was going on with ‘Iron Fist,’ because [fans] hadn’t heard anything about it, but there’s never been any change at all.”

In fact, when asked if fans can expect to see some casting announcements or other hard news sometime soon, Loeb said:

“The short answer is, ‘Yes, there’ll be news.”

While that news certainly comes as, well, good news, it’d be better if we had a bit of an explanation as to why things have been quiet to begin with. Loeb provides one:

“We knew exactly what we were doing at Marvel and at Netflix. Let’s get [‘Jessica Jones’] out there, everybody knows that ‘Luke Cage’ is up and going. What I can say right now is we’re very excited about ‘Iron Fist.'”

This all makes sense because, unlike major motion pictures, Marvel’s TV series have relatively much smaller budgets and a much smaller marketing window. With Netflix releasing all episodes of a series/season at once, it’s conceivable that most viewers will consume the whole thing during its opening weekend. After that, it’s onto the next big thing.

I actually like that they’ve managed to carve out sections of the calendar that are dedicated in majority to whatever their next project is rather than the one that’s coming after. The best news to take away from all of Loeb’s quotes is this: Iron Fist is coming, and soon we’ll know who’ll be bringing Danny Rand to life.