Click to email this to a friend (Opens in new window)

A surprising report in Mexico’s Medio Tempo has claimed that the USA vs Mexico friendly scheduled for Wednesday may not proceed as planned due to the poor condition of temporary grass installed in the Alamodome.

The temporary sod is laid flat over concrete, and Mexico was unable to train today because the field was in bad condition. The grounds crew then heeded Mexico’s warnings and worked to improve the condition of the field.

The report says that Mexico instead practiced at the Trinity University field today, and the general manager of the Mexican Soccer Federation Hector Gonzalez Inarritu has floated the idea of refusing to play should Alamodome conditions not improve. It says they will assess the field conditions again today or tomorrow.

The game was scheduled in San Antonio to utilize the large 60,000-seat capacity of the Alamodome, despite sacrificing both home field advantage and logistics in the process. A pro-Mexican crowd has already sold out the match just 150 miles north of the USA-Mexico border, and now issues with the playing surface have arisen.

#SodUpdate: The pitch has been transported to San Antonio and installation is underway at the #Alamodome! pic.twitter.com/ok8yL6RtLu — U.S. Soccer (@ussoccer) April 11, 2015

The scene for Miguel Herrera's makeshift press conference at Trinity University in San Antonio #USAvMEX pic.twitter.com/oVoWoEYQmr — John Strong (@StrongMLS) April 14, 2015

It’s unclear what would happen officially should Mexico refuse to play, with a forfeit and a flat out cancellation of the match both in play. The United States is scheduled to train at 5pm tonight on the surface. US Soccer has responded accordingly:

Regarding the USA-Mexico field conditions & reports, U.S. Soccer is confident the field will be ready or Wednesday’s #USMNT friendly. — Ives Galarcep (@SoccerByIves) April 14, 2015

(1/2) More Buethe:"The field installation was not completed when the Mexico National Team representative saw it on Monday." #usmnt #USAvMEX — Jeff Carlisle (@JeffreyCarlisle) April 14, 2015

Follow @the_bonnfire