UPDATE 11/10 9:45 AM EST: The filmmakers behind Basmati Blues has released an official comment regarding criticism of the trailer for their production.

Monique Caulfield and Danny Baron said in a statement:

“We deeply regret any offense caused by the Basmati Blues trailer. We have heard a number of voices that have understandably reacted to a trailer that is not representative of the film as a whole. Unfortunately, the international trailer has given the wrong impression of the film’s message and heart. This movie is not about an American going abroad to solve India’s problems. At its heart, this film is about two people who reach across cultures, fight against corporate greed, and find love. Basmati Blues is an ensemble musical romantic comedy. The film explores our responsibility for our actions and for each other, and attempts to do it in a disarming way, using music, comedy and romance. Basmati Blues is a love letter to multiple eras of Bollywood cinema, musicals, and classic Hollywood romantic comedies. We are confident that the film, when seen in its entirety, will bear out the our appreciation and respect for India and its people.”

—————

One of Brie Larson's upcoming movies is causing major controversy following the drop of its trailer last week. Basmati Blues follows Linda, a scientist played by Brie, who travels to India in an attempt to sell genetically modified rice to the local farmers. However, once she realizes that her company is actually evil, she tries to work against them to save the people, and people have several big problems with it.

In the trailer, Brie's character hits pretty much every stereotype about Indian culture. There's a scene of her sampling some local fare, and then immediately screaming and dramatically fanning her face because of the spice; some locals trick her into doing something embarrassing under the guise of teaching her their customs; and, to top it off, Brie's character wears a traditional sari and partakes in a huge, colorful dancing scene reminiscent of so many Bollywood films. Linda also falls in love with a local farmer, played by Utkarsh Ambudkar, and at one point exotifies it all by proclaiming, "India is this exciting journey." Basically, the entire plot seems to revolve around one white woman rescuing an entire village of supposedly helpless people, reinforcing the white savior narrative seen countless times in Hollywood.

The film, which BuzzFeed reports Brie signed on to in 2013 and has struggled to get picked up worldwide, seems to be an odd choice for the actress, who has previously said that she makes movies "as a form of activism" and is known for playing strong female characters. Brie has spoken up about social issues in the past; she supported activists at Standing Rock who protested the Dakota Access Pipeline and often posts on social media about gun control, LGBTQ rights, and mental health issues, for instance.

Brie has not yet responded to the criticism of Basmati Blues, though many have taken to social media to express their feelings about the movie. One Twitter user wrote, "It’s 2017 & they’re really still releasing these things." Another blamed the cringe-worthiness of the film on the fact that it was conceived in 2013 (although, this portrayal would be offensive in any year). The user wrote, "Basmati Blues was shot before Short Term 12 was even released. Why are people freaking out so much? I get it, it's incredibly offensive, but we all make mistakes. I'm sure that Brie Larson wouldn't sign onto a project like that today." Still, others found the whole thing to be inappropriate and disappointing, saying, "I just watched the trailer for Basmati Blues and I'm not even angry just massively secondhand embarrassed for everyone involved," "Cringeworthy to say the least," and "* Deep, disappointed sigh *."

Watch the trailer and read more reactions, below.

Related: Brie Larson on Her Friendships With Jennifer Lawrence and Emma Stone