Dec 30, 2015; San Diego, CA, USA; USC Trojans defensive tackle Noah Jefferson (91) and defensive tackle Kenny Bigelow Jr. (95) work against each other before the game against the Wisconsin Badgers in the 2015 Holiday Bowl at Qualcomm Stadium. Mandatory Credit: Jake Roth-USA TODAY Sports

One of the most exciting Tweets to come across our Arizona Football Twitter feed recently is the announcement by USC defensive tackle Noah Jefferson that he had committed to the University of Arizona. We had to find out more.

Recently Arizona Football has had a multitude of recruits poached from their lists, especially from Oregon head coach Willie Taggart (Cody Shear and Braxton Burmeister to name a few). So it’s great to hear when a current USC Trojan decides that Arizona Football is the better program for him.

First things first,we wa nted to know when Noah actually made the decision and why. “It was the Sunday I committed,” said Noah, “I took an unofficial visit and sat down with Coach Rich Rod, they made me feel like I was at home. The coaches understood my mentality and how I play. I liked the position they were gonna play me in their scheme.” Not to mention, “It was the best situation for me and my family.”

When it comes to inspiration or motivation, he turns to who he can count on in life, “My wife and family are my motivation.” When asked what inspires him, what his motivating mantra may be, his answer was spiritual. “My favorite scripture is Jeremiah 29:11: For I know the plans I have for you, Declares the Lord. Plans to prosper you and not to harm you. Plans to give you hope and a future,” quoted Jefferson.

Pretty powerful stuff.

Jefferson’s dad played football at Maryland, his older brother won a Super Bowl with the Denver Broncos (Will Parks team, and Rickey Hunley’s former team), and his little brother is one of the top 7th graders in the country for basketball. Jefferson’s wife is a prelaw major at UNLV. Pretty. Darn. Cool.

Pets? “I don’t really have any pets, lol, they died.”

How would Jefferson and his family describe him? “Fun, great sense of humor, like to have fun, very competitive hate to lose, laid back and mellow at times.” He has no nickname yet, kind of up to us, “Y’all can call me what you want!”

After talking it over with God and my family I would like to Announce that I have Commited to The University Of Arizona #BearDown pic.twitter.com/xAfzqFgnym — Noah Jefferson  (@noahjefferson_) March 6, 2017

Noah told us he would keep in touch with a few players from SC, “I don’t want to lose touch with is Kevin Scott, Chuma Edoga.” He learned some important lessons from his time at SC, specifically that he has competitive nature and that he will never get outworked.

Jefferson is looking forward to establishing who he is once he gets to Tucson, which is the second Day of Fall Camp, “I’m just ready to be on the field again!” He feels his greatest strength are his Athleticism, pass rushing and ability to stop the run. Well, that is much-needed in Arizona! We hoped he could play next season, but weren’t sure of his situation so we asked and he answered, “I can play if this waiver goes through, but I can for sure practice and stuff.”

https://twitter.com/noahjefferson_/status/823724646952337408

So in a nutshell, Arizona’s latest commit, is passionate about football, is spiritual and deep, and wants to prove to Wildcats fans and himself that he is on the right path, in the right place and going to show up and kill it on the field. One thing he has his sights set on, and I hope the coaches can make this happen for him, he wants a jersey with a ‘single digit.’

Here are some highlights of Noah to take in:

We thank Noah and his family for his time with us, Wildcats fans have things to look forward to next season, and Noah Jefferson is a big one.