Jon Gruden claims the reason Jimmy Graham isn't getting the ball enough is the fact that Russell Wilson doesn't have the time in the pocket to find him down the field. (0:40)

CINCINNATI -- If Russell Wilson has his way, the trip to his native Queen City this weekend will be one part business, one part feasting.

"The Nasty 'Nati," the Seattle Seahawks quarterback said Wednesday, laughing as he opened his conference call with Cincinnati Bengals reporters. "I haven't had a chance to go lately, but I'm excited to hopefully get some White Castles and Skyline Chili."

Fast food chains White Castle and Skyline Chili are two of the region's more iconic after-hours eating establishments. People born in and around Cincinnati, like Wilson, swear by both. Next to Pete Rose's record-setting 4,192nd career hit, Skyline's three-way and four-way are the most important numbers to those who call Southwest Ohio and Northern Kentucky home.

Hey, @DangeRussWilson, stop in and we'll treat you like royalty. We don't speak for the @Bengals D-line, though. http://t.co/RprxdEeD3M — White Castle (@WhiteCastle) October 8, 2015

Born in Cincinnati's Christ Hospital, Wilson spent very little time in the area before his family moved to Virginia. When he steps foot inside Paul Brown Stadium on Sunday, he will be playing in Cincinnati for the first time in his life. Although he did play the Cincinnati Bearcats once in college, that was a home game for the North Carolina State Wolfpack that Wilson quarterbacked for three years before his only year at Wisconsin.

Wilson said he knew there would be some nostalgia when the Seattle Seahawks landed in the region this weekend.

"We would go back up there every year a few times a year, so ... I used to love watching the Cincinnati Reds," Wilson said. "My dad always used to talk about the Bengals even though he was a huge Chargers fan. Anthony Munoz and guys like that. There's a bunch of memories watching them play. Growing up I used to love their jerseys.

"Like I said, I have very fond memories."

The last time the Bengals and Seahawks met was in 2011, one year before Wilson was drafted by Seattle.