Hello backers and people-trying-to-decide-about-backing (do it, Reflex is brilliant).

First of all, we just want to thank everyone for the huge amount of support and excitement there has been about Reflex. We've put a lot of time and money into the game and it's been amazing to see people just as keen as we are to see it happen. Please keep spreading the word and together we can make Reflex a reality!

For today's update, we thought we would give you all a quick overview of (just some) of the game modes we've got planned.

Duel - "A prearranged contest with deadly weapons between two people in order to settle a point of honor". With no one to carry, duel in Reflex is the ultimate test of your timing, movement, aim, positioning and item control. Luck will not save you and the best player always wins.

Deathmatch - One of the most chaotic (but extremely fun) modes. You will be thrown into an arena with between 3-11 hostile players. Shoot anything that moves and gain an advantage with one (or more!) of the 6 planned powerups. The winner is whoever can hit the frag limit first.



Team Deathmatch - A mode all about teamwork and item control. The strongest team will be the one that keeps the tightest hold of key items such as armors and powerups. Our development focus for this mode is to reward intelligent teamplay, making it more than just "Don't shoot the blue guys".

Capture The Flag - Get in to the enemy base, grab their flag, get it back to your base. Would be easy if there weren't people trying to kill you. Attacking players will find the most advantage through their mastery of the movement while defending players will benefit from precise aim and good control of their bases resources. Sudden death CTF overtimes are the closest I've come to a game induced heart attack.

Arena - A round based mode in which players spawn with all weapons and good armor, ditching control and timing for 100% combat. This mode can be played either as 1v1 or with as many team members as you can cram into a map. The victor will be the team with the fastest reflexes, tightest aim and best sense of fight or flight.

Control - Gain points by taking (and holding!) key areas. The more control points you hold, the faster your teams score will increase (but the thinner you spread your defenses). Grab some items and gank an enemy point of fight off a constant barrage of players who dare attack your point.

Flag Control - A violent game of hide and seek. Players spawn in an arena with a single flag and gain points for as long as they can hold on to it (without being turned into giblets). If you've ever participated in an extended fight over a powerup, this is that, all match.

Race - The mode of choice for pacifists. Compete with other players to set the fastest time through an obstacle course full of trick jumps. A good place to hone your movement skills and maybe one day claim a new world record time.

Juggernaut - A team must work together to take down a single, highly buffed opponent. Manage to take down the juggernaut and you will become the juggernaut (and can then enjoy the immense satisfaction of repeatedly stomping an entire enemy team all by yourself)

Freeze Tag - Players are frozen instead of fragged and points are gained by icing all members of the opposing team. Players can thaw out their team mates to prevent the other team scoring. This adds an interesting twist to the game, requiring players to respawn their friends and carefully guard enemy icicles.

Midair - A classic mode for quick, low pressure games. Players are thrown in to a small arena armed only with a rocket launcher. Points are only awarded by turning airborne targets into a shower of sparks, oil and robot chunks. Fun, extremely satisfying and good training for frag-film quality aim.

We've got a few more modes all planned out but these are the ones you can expect to see making their way into the Prototype builds. Whatever your skill level or play style, Reflex is going to have something fun, violent and generally awesome for you!

Want more Reflex?