An Australian backpacker was left shocked after she was told she could not rent a flat in Edinburgh because people from her country are 'drunks and racists'.

Laura Gratton, 24, saw the £400-a-month room advertised online and inquired about the possibility of living there having recently moved to Scotland for the first time.

But the landlord turn down her request straight away - saying that 'it is well known that Australians are racist' and she would therefore not be a good housemate.

And after Miss Gratton - who is working in a restaurant in Edinburgh - pointed out that she is friends with people from all around the world, the man again insisted that 'Australia is the most racist nation'.

Rejected: Backpacker Laura Gratton was told she couldn't rent a flat in Edinburgh because she is Australian

Advert: The traveller saw this notice posted on spareroom.co.uk and responded to it

The backpacker, originally from Melbourne, moved to Scotland after visiting Edinburgh for a weekend and falling in love with the historic city instantly.

She has been travelling around different countries for years, and was previously working in London after securing a two-year UK visa.

Miss Gratton saw the flat advertised on spareroom.co.uk, offering a room in a shared house in the centre of Edinburgh, and sent a message to the landlord to express his interest.

The man replied: 'Hi Laura, it is well known in Europe that Australians are racist. In fact around the world your people are famous for this.

'Just as France is famous for wine and cheese. Australia is famous for its drunks and racists. I'm sorry I need to reject this request.'

Response: The landlord sent Miss Gratton these two messages telling her Australians are 'drunks and racists'

Travels: The keen backpacker is travelling the word including a stop in London

Globetrotter: She has also snapped keepsake photographs and landmarks around the world, and is pictured her in Paris

Outraged at the response, Miss Gratton wrote to him saying: 'You obviously are quite racist putting such labels and speculations on a whole race without knowing the individual.

'The majority of my closest friends are from across the globe so would hate to think I'm racist. So thank you for rejecting this email, I don't think we would get along at all. And I suggest you actually visit Australia and realise how multicultural we are.'

But the landlord then sent her a link to a news report about racism in Australia, adding: 'Hi, I'm not judging a whole race. I don't want to take the risk. It is fact Australia is the most racist nation, your people are so open about it as well.

'This is what you Australians are known for in Europe. I think we would still get along by the way. Anyway, good luck.'

Miss Gratton said afterwards: 'When I first received the response I thought it was just a joke but then I realised that he was being serious.

Adventurous: Miss Gratton with an Italian friend posing for a picture together in Stockholm

'I was angry and frustrated that someone could think like this and say it to me just because of where I was from.

'Australia is a multi-cultural and very accepting country. There are race issues like any other country - but the actions of a few shouldn't be used to judge anyone from that country.

'This was my first encounter of such strong negative and offensive stereotyping on my travels. I have heard the odd joke about drinking to do with Australians or Irish people but it has only ever been jokes among friends, never anything intended to hurt like this.'

No joke: Ms Gratton said she could not believe the response at first but was offended when it turned out to be real

A spokesman for spareroom.co.uk added: 'If we'd spotted anything like this in someone's ad we'd have removed it instantly.

'Dismissing a whole nation as racist is, frankly, ridiculous. There are clear laws about discrimination when it comes to renting rooms but it's not just about what is and isn't legal - it's about treating people as you'd want them to treat you.'