



BFI: Eyes Without a Face Blu-ray Detailed Posted July 9, 2015 04:56 PM by Webmaster



The British Film Institute has detailed its upcoming Blu-ray release of director Georges Franju's Eyes Without a Face (1960), starring Pierre Brasseur, Alida Valli, Juliette Mayniel, François Guérin, and Edith Scob. The release will be available for purchase on August 24.



Synopsis: Both cruel and tender, Eyes Without a Face, Georges Franju's unique blend of pulp, horror and poetry has been a major influence on filmmakers, from Jesús Franco to Pedro Almodóvar.



On 24 August 2015 the BFI brings it to Blu-ray for the first time in the UK, releasing it in a Dual Format Edition (Blu-ray and DVD discs) which also contains two short films by Franju, the 2009 documentary Les Fleurs maladives de Georges Franju, an interview with actress Edith Scob and an audio commentary by Tim Lucas.



Dr Genessier (Pierre Brasseur, Le Quai Des Brumes, Les Enfants du Paradis) is a brilliant and obsessive plastic surgeon driven by the need to restore his daughter's (Edith Scob, Judex) disfigured face. He is aided in this quest by his loyal assistant Louise (Alida Valli, Senso), who lures unwitting young women to the secret surgery in his secluded chateau.



Special Features: Monsieur et Madame Curie (Georges Franju, 1953, 14 mins): the life and work of the pioneering scientists, told through the words of Marie Curie

La Premiere nuit (Georges Franju, 1958, 20 mins): a 10-year-old boy spends a night in the Métro

Les Fleurs maladives de Georges Franju (Pierre-Henri Gibert, 2009, 50 mins): an overview of Georges Franju's career

For Her Eyes Only – an interview with Edith Scob (LP Hugo, 2014, 17 mins): the actress talks about her work with Georges Franju and their friendship

Audio commentary by film critic Tim Lucas of Video Watchdog

Illustrated booklet featuring essays by Kate Ince, Isabel Stevens, Roberto Cueto Llera, Raymond Durgnat, Kevin Jackson, Michael Brooke and full film credits





Source: Blu-ray.com | Permalink | [Country settings]



Sort by popularity Sort by date



Top contributor rapta Jul 09, 2015 A shame they couldn't secure the rights for Le Sang des Bêtes which they had originally listed when this was announced last January, but glad we are FINALLY getting this! I wonder if we'll get a slipcover for waiting SO LONG for this to be released?

Sigmund100 Jul 10, 2015 Is Billy Idol in this?



Add comment



Please login to post a comment.





