SEATTLE, July 2 /PRNewswire/ -- Cedar Grove Composting announced today that it is working with BioFerm Energy Systems, a German-based clean energy generation company owned by The Viessmann Group, to integrate anaerobic digestion into its composting process. The proposed technology employs a high-solids anaerobic digester that produces a usable biogas by enhancing natural processes to convert food scraps and yard clippings into a viable fuel. That biogas can then be used as either natural gas for auto and truck fuel or to produce electricity. Cedar Grove is in the engineering and design phase of this project.

"Cedar Grove is always seeking proven new technologies to bring waste materials to a higher use, for example, turning food waste into compost or energy," said Steve Banchero, Cedar Grove Composting CEO. "Cedar Grove is moving into the next realm of its development, the creation of green energy from food scraps that were once destined for a land fill. This is the closed loop business model that is our core competency and focus."

The project is one of the first and largest of its kind in the U.S. The digester will produce biogas by converting once wasted food and yard scraps into digestate that can then be combusted to produce electricity and heat, or be scrubbed to natural gas quality. These can be used as a renewable alternative to compressed natural gas applications, such as transportation fuel. Once operational, the digester will produce energy equivalent to the electricity usage of 400 homes or the fuel for 1,100 passenger vehicles per year.

"Like all of our sustainable business models, we need a healthy aftermarket for the products and by-products we produce in order for our programs to be viable," continued Banchero. "Our model is to continue to make quality products from materials that are otherwise destined for the landfill and sell them back into our local market. We are currently looking to secure contracts for sale of electricity or natural gas in order to complete our digester business plan."

"We have researched this technology in use in Europe and we are hopeful through our partnership with BioFerm that we can adapt it to U.S. standards and economics. We are excited about its potential to produce green energy from food scraps and yard waste," Banchero said. "Our plans are to start with a relatively small digester and expand the use of this technology when it has proven itself in our system."

By producing energy from food waste and reducing green house gases, Cedar Grove will help reduce landfill volumes, saving space for items that truly have no greater usage. Energy made from source separated food and yard waste is also a cleaner fuel than landfill derived methane.

About Cedar Grove Composting

Cedar Grove Composting is part of a family-owned 400-employee enterprise with roots in the waste management business going back to 1938. As the Pacific Northwest's leading organic recycling company, Cedar Grove transforms grass, leaves, yard trimmings, food waste and wood waste into the finest, nutrient-rich compost. Cedar Grove has developed a full line of healthy soils with a loyal following and has grown from humble beginnings to one of the largest urban composting facilities in the world. Check www.cgcompost.com or call 206-832-3000 for more information.

SOURCE Cedar Grove Composting