In the wake of the sexual harassment allegations against Justin Caldbeck, he has since released a public apology, wherein he promised to seek professional counseling for his behavior after stepping down from his position at Binary Capital.

Netizens were quick to collectively eye roll at the statement:

Sorry you did it or sorry you got called out, bro? It’s sexual assault- as in criminal, not ‘indefinite leave’ situation — Ian Bray (@IanABray) June 24, 2017

an asian fetish or did you think those women would be less likely to say something? — ShawnNorth (@shawnpuwo) June 24, 2017

Created a list for people like you pic.twitter.com/bSVN4c2W6Q — Space Cowboy (@haxforce) June 24, 2017

Especially fellow techie, Brendan Mulligan:

Hey @caldbeckj, go find a bucket of acid to dip your face in, you fucking horrible piece of shit. https://t.co/Dc7mbANkXM — Brenden Mulligan (@mulligan) June 23, 2017

Mulligan was so upset that he took to Medium.com to write his thoughts on the matter. There, he dissected Caldbeck’s apology piece by piece to point out any flaws and issues he found with the statement.

As the post continues to gain traction, it draws readers to comment their own thoughts and feelings on his writings. This includes one of the women responsible for bringing Caldbeck’s inappropriate behavior to light, Niniane Wang, who wrote a response to Mulligan’s article:

“I’m one of the 3 women who went on the record to expose Justin’s sexual harassment. I laughed out loud reading your post. It’s so well-written!

I’ve been trying to expose Justin for 7 years. He kept threatening reporters, and it was incredibly difficult to get this article out. He fought tooth and nail. Then he writes this apology (that was surely drafted by a crisis PR firm), and suddenly I’m seeing people say “We’re all human and make mistakes” and “I’m glad he’s learning” and “What a heartfelt apology”.

My fear is that if people actually believe that, what if the leave of absence doesn’t become permanent? Are people going to let him come back in 6 months when he’s “reflected” and learned his lesson?

I do not believe that someone can harass women for 10 years, tell the people who exposed him to go fuck themselves, and then 24 hours later, thank them for bringing him self-awareness.“

Wang also took to Twitter to point out another issue with Caldbeck’s apology:

To all who like Justin Caldbeck’s apology: It starts with “Attributable to Justin Caldbeck”. It was written by PR firm. Did he even read it? — niniane (@niniane) June 24, 2017

It remains to be seen what will happen to Justin Caldbeck in the future.