Across the province people are feeling the ripple effect of the cuts being made by the provincial government. On Saturday, people from various walks of life joined together to protest.

“We’re all in this together. When you cut something it’s not just the people that are directly impacted by the jobs, it’s the people also that utilize the services,” said Darin Milo with the Regina and District Labour Council.

Approximately 150 people from various groups protested funding cuts and Bill 40, which would allow the government to sell off up to 49 per cent of crowns, at a rally in front of Finance Minister Kevin Doherty’s constituency office. The rally was organized by the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour.

Representatives from Unifor, Students Mobilizing Against Cuts, and Public Pasture — Public Interest were among the speakers. This was one of many protests that have been happening across the province since the budget was released on March 22.

“Different organizations are going to have their different protests but what we’re also seeing are different groups attending protests of groups that they’re not normally associated with and it’s kind of all coming together that way,” Milo said.

Rick Ostlund, a Sasktel employee and Unifor member, spoke at the protest. Ostlund has attended various rallies and each time he has been reassured by the number of people attending.

“Its good to support the public on coming out and rising up against and letting the Sask Party know that what they’ve said and done over the last few years is a detriment to this province,” he said.

Ostlund said that during his years as a Sasktel employee, he has seen the impact the Saskatchewan Party’s policies has had on the crown corporation and now he is seeing those policies spill out to affect the rest of the province.

“Everybody sees the same thing, cuts that are hurtful. And so its reaffirmation of what we’ve known for quite a few years. So its good to see everybody else finally getting behind it and standing up against it,” he said.

Ostlund said he believes the protests are having an effect and are helping to make changes in the province.

“I think its changed the perception in this province of the current way that the government is running is not for the people, it’s for the business. The small changes one at a time will accumulate and add up to a lot,” he said.

NDP interim leader and leader of the official opposition, Trent Wotherspoon, also spoke at the rally.

“We’re going to fight for people in the legislature, we’re going to fight for people in the community, we’re going to rally and reach out … to fight to stop the cuts and to fight to stop the damaging sell-offs” he said.

arobinson@postmedia.com

twitter.com/ashleymr1993