Tyrone Troutman was just a boy 25 years ago when he saw his dad stab his mom a dozen times in the chest and neck. His mom survived.

But history repeated itself at the family home Thursday night when an argument about his mother's stabbing all those years ago raised his father's ire again — this time with a deadly result, the Broward Sheriff's Office said.

Joseph Troutman grabbed a foot-long butcher knife from the kitchen and charged at his son with it, officials said. He knocked his son to the floor and stabbed him in the back around 11:30 p.m., they said.

His 40-year-old son, covered in blood, reached a neighbor's home for help. When the neighbor opened the door, Tyrone Troutman shouted, "My father stabbed me!"

He collapsed and later that night died at a hospital.

Joseph Troutman, 63, phoned 911 to say he had stabbed his son, officials said. He was arrested on a second-degree murder charge.

His son had witnessed his father's violence at a Deerfield Beach home on the night of April 10, 1989, when Joseph Troutman was arguing with his then-wife, Ora Troutman, records show.

Tyrone, then 15, saw his father with a knife in his hand and on top of his mother in the master bedroom. He saw his mother bleeding from the stab wounds his dad had inflicted.

The assault that day began while Ora Troutman was taking a shower, according to John Contini, the lawyer who represented Joseph Troutman in the case.

"He was wearing a ski mask over his head at the time and she was stabbed repeatedly and their son saved her life by jumping on his father's back" and pulling off the mask, Contini said. "This allowed her to get away, and she ran naked to a neighbor and survived."

Joseph Troutman later saw officers outside the home. When one officer asked his name, he spontaneously said, "We were fighting, and I cut her."

An officer found Ora Troutman on a couch inside the home. She was lying on her back, wrapped in a blanket. She was taken to a hospital.

Later that year, Joseph and Ora Troutman divorced, records show.

Joseph Troutman faced an attempted murder charge. But in March 1990, he pleaded guilty to a lesser charge and served about a third of a reduced seven-year sentence, according to Contini.

"He was respectful, courteous and seemingly remorseful and even likable," Contini said. "We all came to the same conclusion that the family supported the [reduced sentence] and the second chance for him, notwithstanding the horrific facts involved."

Relatives said Tyrone Troutman had been living with his father on and off and they had tried to reconcile their differences since the knife attack. Tyrone Troutman himself grew to have a temper, a relative said.

"Anyone going through that horror would have to be suffering from PTSD all this time, unless he had some real intervention and help," Contini said. "These are things that simply cannot be expunged from your memory."

A few months ago, Tyrone Troutman moved into his dad's North Lauderdale residence in the 6500 block of Harbour Road, the Sheriff's Office said. That's where Thursday's stabbing happened.

According to the Sheriff's Office, Joseph Troutman and his son were arguing, and the dispute soon became about Ora Troutman's stabbing.

Tyrone Troutman's girlfriend, Donna Lalor, told investigators that Joseph Troutman became enraged after his son grabbed a radio from the table and smashed it.

Joseph Troutman then grabbed a butcher knife, came at his son and stabbed him, Lalor told investigators.

She was able to get between the men while telling the elder Troutman to stop, an arrest report said.

Tyrone Troutman was able to run to the home of neighbor Diego Arias and bang on his door. Arias found Tyrone Troutman covered in blood. He asked him what had happened.

"I'm sure it was terrifying for him," sheriff's spokeswoman Dani Moschella said. "There was [Troutman], bloody and on the ground, saying his father had stabbed him. And then he becomes unresponsive."

Arias began CPR on the wounded man.

"He did everything he could," Moschella said.

Arias' niece, Catherine Arredondo, 18, and her grandmother were at Arias' home at the time.

Arredondo said Tyrone Troutman was drifting in and out of consciousness.

"First he was like gone, he just looked at us as if he was gone and my uncle just started putting pressure on his heart," she said. "It was scary."

Donna Lalor "was just hysterical," Arredondo said. "She was shocked."

North Lauderdale Fire Rescue took Tyrone Troutman to Broward Health North, where he was pronounced dead.

After Joseph Troutman called 911, he told detectives that he was acting in self defense, authorities said. But he also acknowledged his son was not armed, they said. Joseph Troutman was treated at Broward Health Medical Center for a cut on his hand, the Sheriff's Office said.

Contini was shaken by the news of Tyrone Troutman's death.

"He was a hero 25 years ago saving his mom and now he's dead," he said. "It's more than horrific, it's painfully sad beyond measure."

Staff researcher Barbara Hijek and staff writer Juan Ortega contributed to this report.

wkroustan@tribune.com or 954-356-4303



CORRECTION: An earlier version of this online article contained incorrect information about Joseph Troutman. Records that described a 1996 Georgia cocaine case had nothing to do with him.

