GOP strategist Ana Navarro said Monday Republicans would be attempting to impeach Hillary Clinton Hillary Diane Rodham ClintonSanders: 'I fully expect' fair treatment by DNC in 2020 after 'not quite even handed' 2016 primary Sanders: 'Damn right' I'll make the large corporations pay 'fair share of taxes' Former Sanders campaign spokesman: Clinton staff are 'biggest a--holes in American politics' MORE immediately if they discovered she shared classified information with a Russian official.

Navarro, a vocal Trump critic, seemed to point at an alternate reality if Clinton had won the election instead of Donald Trump Donald John TrumpHouse committee believes it has evidence Trump requested putting ally in charge of Cohen probe: report Vietnamese airline takes steps to open flights to US on sidelines of Trump-Kim summit Manafort's attorneys say he should get less than 10 years in prison MORE.

If Hillary Clinton leaked classified info to a Russian spook/diplomat, Republicans would rightly be drafting Articles of Impeachment N-O-W. — Ana Navarro (@ananavarro) May 15, 2017

Navarro's tweet came shortly after the Washington Post reported Monday evening that Trump shared highly classified information about the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) with top Russian diplomats in a meeting last week, a charge multiple White House officials have denied.

A U.S. official with knowledge of the meeting told the Post that the president “revealed more information to the Russian ambassador than we have shared with our own allies.”

ADVERTISEMENT

Since the presidential election, Trump and his associates have come under public scrutiny for their praise and seemingly warm relationship to the Kremlin.

Trump met with Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov and Russian Ambassador Sergey Kislyak at the White House last week.

Sen. Bob Corker (R-Tenn.) says the Trump administration needs to reverse the “downward spiral” it finds itself in, following the Post report.

“The White House has got to do something soon to bring itself under control and in order,” the senator said Monday, according to Bloomberg. “It’s got to happen.”