Third most popular Sina Weibo microblog post of the past 24 hours…

From Sina Weibo:

@微博搞笑排行榜: A restaurant in Chengdu hired foreign male model to be a server!! Business has exploded!!!!

Comments from Sina Weibo:

山涧小院子：

Tisk tisk, seeing so many people in the comments criticizing these girls for worshiping the foreign and fawning over foreigners, really, that’s enough now! If if were a group of Heavenly Kingdom [Chinese] handsome guys, we’d be just as excited, okay?

曾静薇_：

Pshaw! What’s worth commenting about the selling sex? I just want to say: Where in Chengdu?

官网美瞳喵：

An offense to public morality! Every time I see this kind of news, my first reaction is: tell me the address!

lovewonwon：

Look at the pile of men who can’t get any eating sour grapes, as if they wouldn’t go if it were women dressed scantily as servers, hehe.

维生素Dddd：

Look at the female customers smiling and laughing so much they can’t even keep heir legs together…

喵难揍：

What can men do these days other than grumbling/complaining?! If you looked as handsome as them, there’d also be a pile of girls unable to keep their legs together for you! Unable to eat grapes so saying the grapes are sour! You’re not handsome, so you complain about women liking handsome guys; you don’t have money so you complain about beautiful girls living off rich men; you don’t have a lot of academic achievement so you complain about others having high scores but low ability! Which is to say you spend all day YY about beautiful women throwing themselves into your arms. If you have nothing better to do, then just rub one out [masturbate].

逗比-南波吐：

I see the one being carried is my girlfriend. What should I do? Should I break up with her?

扒蒜老妹儿-：

There are guys saying this group of girls worship the foreign and fawn over foreigners. Are you guys stupid or what? When you see a wave of beautiful women, do you first think of their nationality? Fuck, of course you’ll be looking at their bodies. If you had an eight-pack of abs, a face like Daniel Wu, you could be from Tieling Xiweizi Village and no one would care. Fuck, foreign worship can be dragged into even this.

我不是大龄女青年：

Fuck! What’s the address?! Get out of my way!

此号无人使用20140120：