Ian Wright has been appointed co-host of BBC Radio 5 live's 606 programme for the 2013/14 season.

The former Arsenal striker will present the live football phone-in show with Kelly Cates on Sundays.

Wright - who previously worked as a pundit on Match of the Day - said he was pleased to be back on the BBC.

"There will be lots to talk about and a lot of divided opinion," he said. "For me, it's all about the fans and what the fans think. I like to hear all sorts of opinions, everyone is entitled to one."

Cates - daughter of Liverpool icon Kenny Dalglish - said of Wright: "As well as having been a brilliant footballer, he's a real fan of the game."

"You don't know what somebody's going to ask," she continued, "what point somebody's going to make, which way the conversation is going to go.

"When it does get heated and it does get passionate, that's really important because it shows people care."

Perou

David Davies/PA Archive

Meanwhile, Match of the Day 2 host Mark Chapman will also present new programme MOTD2 Extra, a debate show focusing on the weekend's games and hot topics. It will air on Sunday lunchtimes simultaneously on BBC One, Radio 5 live and the BBC Sport website.

Dan Walker will continue hosting Football Focus along with 5 live's Friday night preview show. Jason Mohammad will now present a new-look Final Score on Saturdays.

On Match of the Day, former Chelsea striker Gianluca Vialli has signed up as a regular pundit, while Chris Waddle has joined 5 live.

Other regular MOTD pundits alongside Alan Hansen and Alan Shearer will include Gus Poyet, Robbie Fowler, Les Ferdinand, Michael Owen and Robbie Savage.

"This season, the BBC's commitment to football coverage is greater than ever," said Barbara Slater, director of BBC Sport.

"With new-look shows and new names to add to the already impressive presentation and punditry line-up, we're ready to bring all the excitement to our audiences.

"Our digital offering enables fans uninterrupted access to all the key action and events as they unfold, wherever they are, with access to news, scores, TV shows and live radio commentaries on the go."