CLOSE After over 80 years, the first crop of industrial hemp is planted in Broome County. Patrick Oehler/Staff Video

New York State Assemblywoman Donna Lupardo, D-Endwell, speaks about the new industrial hemp farm at Nanticoke Gardens in Endicott on Thursday, July 13, 2017. Lupardo is joined by, from left, Binghamton University's School of Pharmacy Dean Gloria Meredith, and farm co-owners Chip Shafer and Pete Shafer. (Photo: Patrick Oehler/Staff Photo)

ALBANY - New York is looking for industrial hemp growers.

Gov. Andrew Cuomo announced Thursday that an application period is open to participate in the state's Industrial Hemp Agricultural Research Pilot Program.

The program is open to researchers, farmers and businesses who wish to research, grow, manufacture and produce industrial hemp in New York.

"By expanding industrial hemp research, we are opening the doors to innovative ideas that could provide a major boost to our farms and communities, creating new jobs, and laying the foundation for future economic growth," Cuomo said in a statement.

New York has passed a series of laws in recent years to promote and expand the industrial hemp industry, particularly in the Southern Tier and Catskills.

The pilot program was started in 2015, and earlier this year the cap on the number of participants in the program was lifted.

Currently, there are more than 20 licensed partners in the pilot program, leading to rapid growth in the amount of farmland used for industrial hemp production.

New York also created, in July, a $5 million industrial hemp processing grant program that can provide grants up to $500,000 to qualified applicants to help cover costs related to hemp production.

Industrial hemp can be used to make more than 25,000 different products including paper, clothing, construction materials and biofuels.

Applications to join the program will be accepted until Nov. 22.

For more information about the program or to apply, visit the state bureau of Agriculture and Markets website.

NVaughn@Gannett.com

Natasha Vaughn is a staff writer with USA TODAY Network's Albany Bureau.

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/2wboAmy