This article is over 4 years old

CPS confirms no further action will be taken against man who was arrested last December and who has not been named

A sixth man held over the murder of black teenager Stephen Lawrence will not be prosecuted due to insufficient evidence.

The Crown Prosecution Service has confirmed no further action will be taken against the suspect, who has not been named and was arrested 11 months ago.

Lawrence, 18, who wanted to be an architect, was stabbed to death by a group of up to six white youths in an unprovoked racist attack as he waited at a bus stop in Well Hall Road, Eltham, south-east London, with a friend on 22 April 1993.

It took more than 18 years to bring two of his killers – Gary Dobson and David Norris – to justice.

Three other men have also previously been named as suspects but deny involvement.

An inquiry following the murder found failings in how the Metropolitan police had investigated the crime and led to the force being accused of institutional racism.

Lionel Idan, deputy chief crown prosecutor, said: “On October 21 the CPS decided that no further action will be taken in relation to an individual, identified as a suspect in the ongoing police investigation into the murder of Stephen Lawrence.

“A file was received on 31 May 2014 from the Metropolitan police. After careful consideration it has been decided that there is insufficient evidence for a realistic prospect of conviction.

“The decision has been made in accordance with the code for crown prosecutors.

“Any decision by the CPS does not imply any finding concerning guilt or criminal conduct – the CPS makes decisions only according to the test set out in the code for crown prosecutors and it is applied in all decisions on whether or not to prosecute.”

A Metropolitan police spokesman confirmed the man, who is in his 40s, was arrested on 23 December last year on suspicion of Lawrence’s murder.

The spokesman said: “He was bailed to return pending further inquiries and a file submitted to the CPS for their consideration.

“The individual has now been advised there will be no further action against him.”

It comes as a senior police officer facing claims of discreditable conduct linked to the case prepared to be reinstated to full duties next week.

Scotland Yard confirmed last month that Commander Richard Walton, who was removed from operational duties in March, will resume his role on 1 December, even though he is still facing an inquiry by the Independent Police Complaints Commission.