I took a flyer on a Chromebook, and am so glad I did. After hours of research on which one to get, I passed on HP's Chromebook 11 because of the anemic ARM processor and went with the Acer C720 4GB. Most of my laptop time is spent online so this made perfect sense for me. I was already using gmail and drive, as are my kids' schools, so that made the choice even easier. Set up all 4 of our Google accounts on it and now each person can log in to their own Google account. Sets up in only a few minutes right out of the box. Enter your wifi info and Google account and away you go. Also have Crouton loaded, which means I can easily switch between Chrome OS and Linux with a few keystrokes. The screen is above average, plenty bright but certainly not as good as an IPS panel. Viewing angles are fine for me, as I usually am not sharing my screen and if I do I use Chromecast to do it on the big screen TV. Keyboard is also above average, though not as nice as my work Lenovo T430 machine. It took me about 15 mins to get used to the trackpad, but after that i actually love it. 2 finger scroll, nice response, I've come to want it on all my laptops. Speed is phenomenal. Boots from power off in less than 10 seconds. Boots from sleep in 2 seconds. Haswell Celeron Processor, 4G of RAM and SSD drive all contribute to that. No lags in video and no slowness complaints whatsoever. Battery life is as advertised. With 50% screen brightness and normal web surfing I got 9.5 and 10 hours for my first two charges. There is a fan, but it's so quiet i only hear it if i put the vent up to my ear. Runs quiet, runs cool, and runs fast. Charges pretty quick also, though I did not time it. I don't care for the way the SD card sticks out of the side when inserted. I would have liked it to be flush with the case, and use it as a permanent storage space, but not a big deal. Speakers are above average, I never did use laptop speakers much, opting instead to connect it to my home theater or using my phone with earbuds. But the sound quality is very nice on here. Overall I am very happy with Chromebook idea in general, and I am completely confident I bought the best one currently on the market. Best thing about it? It doesn't run Windows and it doesn't run OS X!

Read more