Introducing Rip Clips - Pant Length Management

Rip Clips are the world's first pant length alterations system that doesn't involve needle and thread. Held together with strong rare-earth (neodymium) magnets that keep your pant cuffs in place so you never worry about stepping on them.

Rip Clips work to achieve three goals. First, they protect your pants from being stepped on and ruined. Second, they save you time and energy, compared to standard alteration methods. Lastly, they save you money by being half the cost of an original hem from department stores. If you never get your pants hemmed because it is too much hassle, or if you are tired of paying high alteration fees for an original hem, Rip Clips are for you.

Through many different prototypes and months of testing, Nick and Chris have created a product that solves the problem of pants not always being the perfect length.

Designed to be invisible while wearing, Rip Clips work for all pants that have a standard cuff hem.

The Magic is in The Magnet

All these goals are accomplished with Rip Clips. It all works because of high quality Martensitic stainless steel plates that attach to your shoes and your pant cuffs which are attracted to one another through a neodymium magnet. These little magnets are amazing! They are rated to hold more than 13 pounds of pull force; more than enough to keep your pants off the ground. In fact these little wonders can hold more than 5,000 times their weight!!

Unlike hemming one pair of pants, you can use the same Rip Clips for multiple pairs of pants. Made from the highest quality materials and manufacturing processes, Rip Clips will be protecting your pants for years to come.

The idea for Rip Clips stems from Chris' youth. As a boy he was living in a house without a lot of money. Chris never liked ripped and mangled pant cuffs but he wasn't able to get his pants hemmed. Searching for a solution, Chris would roll up and duct tape the inside of his jeans, stick a nail through the jeans into the sole of his shoe, or stuff the ends of them into his shoes.

One day while looking at a magnetic name tag , Nick and Chris knew that magnets would be a part of the solution they were looking for. After finding out the strength of rare earth neodymium magnets, they knew how. Nick and Chris have a passion for creating this project because it fixes a problem too many people experience, in a new innovative way.

Rip Clips comes in 3 high quality finishes: Pitch Black, Pure White, and exclusive Kick Starter Green. These colors pair perfectly with most shoe sole colors.

Ready when you need them

Specifications:

Magnets:

Shape: Square 3/8"

Weight: .0381 oz.

Magnetized : Permanent, Axially

Material: NdFeB Neodymium (Rare-earth)

Grade: N52 (The strongest on the market)

Coating: Ni-Cu-Ni

Pull Strength: Approx. 13.22 lbs Plates:

Plates:

Each set of Rip Clips consists of 4 stainless steel plates; 2 shoe plates (one for the left shoe and one for the right) and 2 pant plates (left leg and right leg).

Pant Plates: 1/2" tall x 1" wide. These plates are made from high quality Martensitic stainless steel type 430. These plates are designed to slip in-between the stitching of the hem of your jeans and clamp together to hold in place. There are several dimples on the pant plate that hold onto the fabric of your pants, ensuring they wont slip out of place when you wash/dry your pants.

Shoe Plates: The shoe plates are 3/8" tall x 1" wide and are made from the same type 430 stainless steel as the pant plate. They are backed with 3M double sided tape that aligns to your shoe with a simple peel and stick. Two small screws to securely attach to the back of shoes and mount flush with the countersink holes. The super strong neodymium magnet is permanently bonded to the center of the shoe plate.

Where do the Pledge funds go?

100% of the money raised will go towards the first production run of Rip Clips. These funds will allow us to meet the tooling and minimum order quantities set by our different manufacturers.

Manufacturing Process

Rip Clips are proud to be completely designed and manufactured right here in the USA.

Stainless Steel Plates - The stainless steel pant and shoe plates are cut from large, high quality Martensitic stainless steel sheets (type 430). The plates will be made by CPC Fabrication; a sheet metal manufacturing shop right here in Southern California. A high powered laser cutting machine cuts the sheet metal to our exact specifications, then is bent and rounded to pair up with the backs of modern shoes.

Magnets - The magnets are made from neodymium NdFeB otherwise known as “rare earth”. Though this element is not as rare as it sounds, China has created a near monopoly on the global deposits. Meaning the best quality and most cost-effective magnets come from China. Presently this is where we are sourcing the magnets.

Assembly - All Rip Clips products will be assembled and packaged by us in Southern California, USA. This will allow us to keep a close eye on quality to provide you with the best product possible.

International Backers

Please allow for greater shipping times if your destination is outside of North America.

Rewards

The Bat Cave: High quality wood box that displays your Rip Clips compatible shoes. The Bat Cave has a steel plate mounted on the top of the inside, and the magnets on the shoe plates mounted on your shoes have more than enough power to suspend your shoes in mid air.

Rip Clips All Rights Reserved (patent pending)