Classic cars are great to look at. Their sharp chrome bumpers and bold grilles might not be ideal for aerodynamics or pedestrian safety, but they sure do look good.

The problems with owning a classic car start when you climb behind the wheel. Most pre-1960 classics struggle to drive at highway speeds for extended periods of time and braking must be done months in advance to prevent flying through a red light. What are people supposed to do when they want that cool 1950’s style but still need a daily driver? Jonathan Ward of ICON in California thinks he might have the answer: Why not have an unassuming-looking vintage car with modern underpinnings?

There is a shop in California that brings rusty classics into the modern age. It's called ICON customs Clayton Seams , Driving

The ICON workshop is always busy and full of various classics getting the ICON treatment. Clayton Seams , Driving.ca

The bench seats are actually specially filled with high and low density foam to create a bucket seat effect while maintaining the classic look. Clayton Seams , Driving.ca

This Buick uses a supercharged Corvette engine. Note the hand aged plastic cover. Clayton Seams , Driving.ca

The weathered finish of the Derelicts is preserved instead of being painted over. Clayton Seams , Driving.ca

The waiting list to get your very own ICON Derelict is more than two years. Clayton Seams , Driving.ca

“The problem with older cars,” Ward says, “is that you’re a martyr to them.”

Ward realized early on that using a stock 1950’s car as daily transportation was fraught with issues, so he decided to build a 1950’s car of his own. He started with a 1952 Chrysler station wagon that had a lovely rusted and faded patina and added the front clip of a similarly aged DeSoto. Then he got creative.

The ancient Chrysler underpinnings were replaced with an advanced Art Morrison chassis with modern suspension and powerful disc brakes, then a modern 6.1-litre Dodge Hemi was placed under the hood.

This is the point where most hot rodders would paint the wagon a deep metallic red and add modern leather bucket seats to the interior. But Ward did the opposite. He clear-coated the original faded paint on the wagon to preserve it and kept the original layout of the interior. He retained the pizza-sized steering wheel and made all the antique chrome switches and knobs work with a modern climate control system.

It started out as a personal project, but when he was finished, he realized, “This is ICON,” and he turned it into a business.

The car went on to win multiple awards, made it onto an episode of Jay Leno’s Garage, was featured on the cover of Hot Rod magazine and soon enough, requests starting pouring in from people who wanted their very own “brand new” beat-up hot rod.

Ward calls these cars the Derelicts and if you want one, you have to put down a hefty deposit and then wait more than two years before they can even start work on your car. But when you see these cars up close, it’s easy to see why people are willing to wait.

The attention to detail borders insanity. Every visual cue of the cars’ modern underpinnings are carefully hidden. One customer wanted a centre armrest with a modern big-gulp sized cupholder and a charge port for his iPhone. Ward says it took over 140 hours to design, prototype, cad plate and upholster. And that was just for the armrest! Even the bench seats, which look low-tech, feature different kinds of foam to create a bucket sensation as you sit on them with a subtle bolstering effect. It’s easy to walk around one of these cars for hours just soaking in the details.

The fact that these cars don’t require intensive maintenance opens up the market for a whole new buying demographic. Many of the people who buy ICON Derelicts aren’t the type who spend their weekends rebuilding engines on their kitchen table, but are a new kind of enthusiast that want classic style with modern drivability.

But the Derelicts are just one part of ICON’s business. ICON started out as a company making off-road parts for Toyota Land Cruisers and today they make turn-key Land Cruisers and Ford Broncos with modern components. But their off-roaders have paint. Of course, they’ll still make you a Derelict should you wish, but Ward acknowledges that the Derelict cars are “the dumbest business thing we do” because of the insane amount of time it takes to build each one.

There are, of course, people who don’t “get” the Derelicts. The whole point is to preserve that beautiful natural patina the cars have earned, but some people just don’t understand the appeal. But if you want a truly one-of-a-kind classic that gets attention at every car show and can drive you to and from work without issues, you might want to consider getting in line for a Derelict.