*10 P.M. Update*

Texas A&M's former mascot, Reveille VII, has died.

The former First Lady of Aggieland died Thursday morning after undergoing emergency surgery at the Texas A&M Veterinary Hospital.

Reveille VII served as Texas A&M's Mascot from 2001 to 2008.

She died after complications from an ulcer and pneumonia.

Now the former highest ranking member of the Corps of Cadets is being remembered for her contributions to the Aggie spirit.

She came our way from Florida becoming Texas A&M's 7th mascot Reveille in May 2001.

A precious puppy that would become the First Lady of the Corps of Cadets.

James Mulvey was a member of the Corps when News 3 interviewed him in 2006 and was proud to be her handler.

"I leave the dorm about 15 minutes early. I know somebody or a group of people is going to stop me," he said at the time.

From chewing on Bevo along the sidelines during the Lone Star Showdown to even special birthday parties like her 10th in October 2010.

Reveille posed for many pictures but was known to bark at strangers.

"That is her paw, her official paw print," said Tina Gardner as she looked through a scrapbook.

Tina and Paul Gardner of College Station took care of her in her retirement years from 2008 till her passing.

She became ill this week and Thursday morning died of complications from an ulcer.

'I wouldn't say she was spoiled. She was definitely regal," said Paul Gardner.

"She was spoiled," laughed Tina.

Recently Reveille began water treadmill treatment at the Texas A&M Vet School for arthritis.

The Gardners were already planning her 13th birthday for this fall and were planning a "Bark mitzvah," as they are Jewish.

"Maybe she wanted the party part of the "Bark mitzvah," but she really didn't want to have to learn the Hebrew part and so she just chose to go to heaven early," added Tina Gardner.

Funeral arrangements have not been set yet but are expected to happen in September once school resumes with a final resting place in front of Kyle Field looking at the scoreboard.

She would have turned 13 on October 9th.

The Gardners say the Reveille Cemetery will not be impacted by renovations at Kyle Field.

Texas A&M Corps of Cadets Statement

The Office of the Commandant and the Corps of Cadets are deeply saddened to hear of the passing of Reveille VII, the former “First Lady of Aggieland” today in College Station. As Aggies we are all very proud of our mascot, and we have great respect for her and all the tradition that she represents. We in the Corps of Cadets are especially fond of Reveille, as she has been part of the Corps from the beginning, lives with the Corps every day as a member of Company E-2, marches with the Corps at all march-ins and parades, and is the highest ranking member of the Corps of Cadets. We will remember with great fondness all the joy that Reveille VII brought to all Aggies during her time as our mascot, and will remember her excited barks every time our football team scored a touchdown. We know that she will continue to do so in the future as she joins the other Reveilles in the North end of Kyle Field where she will always be able to see the scoreboard and bark for her team. Rest in Peace Miss Reveille. You will be missed but never forgotten…

Reveille

*Previous Story*

The former mascot of Texas A&M, Reveille VII, has died, according to the university.

Reveille was taken to the veterinary school on campus earlier in the week and eventually had to undergo emergency surgery. She died Thursday morning.

The collie was born on October 9, 2000. She was bred in Florida and located by the university after a nationwide search. She officially became A&M's seventh mascot by the Reveille name in May 2001.

Reveille VII retired in the summer of 2008, and had been living with local residents Paul and Tina Gardner.

Details on services for the dog are still being worked out.

Known as the First Lady of Aggieland and the highest ranking member of the university's Corps of Cadets, the Reveille serving as the mascot lives with a cadet on campus and goes to classes with the student.

The first Reveille was a black and white dog hit by students on the way to Navasota and brought back to campus for medical care. When the dog began barking the next morning at the Reveille bugle call, the dog was named after the call.

The university would later decide that the dog should be a collie. The first was Reveille III.

More on this story later on News 3 and KBTX.com



Story on one of Reveille's handlers from 2006

---

The following press release was issued by Texas A&M University regarding the death of Reveille VII:

COLLEGE STATION, May 30, 2013 — Texas A&M University’s mascot that was retired in 2008, Reveille VII, died today after being hospitalized earlier in the week and undergoing emergency surgery at the Small Animal Clinic at the College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences (CVM). She was 12 1/2 years old.

University and Corps of Cadets officials say plans for a suitable memorial service will be announced as soon as details can be finalized. University officials note in planning a suitable memorial service for Rev. VII, they will take into consideration the fact that most students will not return to school until the fall. When Rev. VII’s predecessor died, which also occurred during the summer, the ceremony was deferred until after the start of the fall semester.

Texas A&M mascots are placed in the daily care of the Corps of Cadets’ Company E-2. Reveille is considered “the first lady of Aggieland” and the highest ranking member of the Corps.

Since being retired, Reveille VII had been living with Tina and Paul Gardner who reside in College Station. He is a 1966 Texas A&M graduate.

“Having Reveille VII with us for five glorious years has been one of the greatest things to happen to us during our 46 years of marriage,” Mr. and Mrs. Gardner said in a statement requested by university representatives. “Besides our son, Todd, and his family, wife Stacey, and our three precious grandchildren—Avery, Addison and Adam Gardner—Reveille VII was right up there in our hearts and eyes.”

Reveille VII, was an American Collie, as is her successor, Reveille VIII, the university’s current mascot.

Dr. Stacy Eckman, the veterinarian who had cared for Rev. VII’s medical needs for the past two- and-a-half years, said the university’s retired mascot had been treated for several years for arthritis, as well as other conditions. She was joined by other CVM veterinarians and staffers when the retired mascot was brought in for treatment Tuesday.

Considering her age, Rev VII had been in relatively good health until Tuesday morning, Dr. Eckman said. She noted the average life span for a relatively large dog, such as a collie, is about 12-15 years.

“The Gardners took incredible care of Reveille VII the last five-and-a-half years and that certainly contributed to her longevity and exceptional quality of life,” Dr. Eckman said.

Mr. and Mrs. Gardner were asked by university officials to have Rev. VII live with them about five years ago. They have been actively involved with the Corps of Cadets, as well as other aspects of the university, for more than 40 years. Their son, Todd, is part of the Class of '94 and was a member of Company E-2.

The couple established a fund in 1998 to help cover out-of-pocket expenses for the cadet in Company E-2 designated to be the mascot’s primary handler. Additionally, they established a $50,000 endowment for the benefit of the Small Animal Clinic at the College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences “to give back to the university for the prestigious honor of taking care of Reveille VII during her retirement.”

The Tina and Paul Gardner Reveille VII Research Endowed Fund was established through the Texas A&M Research Foundation for basic science research. The couple invites others to make tax-deductible donations of any amount payable to the fund.