Prosecutors have indicted 214 people on felony rioting charges in connection to protests that broke out in downtown Washington, DC, on Inauguration Day.

Police originally arrested 230 people after demonstrators smashed storefronts and bus stops, launched rocks at police and set fire to a limousine on January 20.

Six police officers were injured as chaos erupted in parts of the capital, just blocks away from where Donald Trump was being sworn in as president.

A grand jury in DC charged five individuals on Tuesday, adding to the 209 defendants who were indicted earlier this month.

Those who have been indicted face up to ten years in prison and a fine up to $25,000.

A grand jury in Washington, DC, charged five individuals on Tuesday in connection to protests that broke out on Inauguration day. Another 209 defendants were indicted on rioting charges earlier this month

Police originally arrested 230 people and charged them with felony rioting after protesters smashed storefronts and bus stops, launched rocks at police and set fire to a limousine on January 20

The US Attorney's Office for the District of Columbia also announced on Tuesday that it was dropping three more cases.

The office did not say why the cases were dismissed but prosecutors have said they're working with police to review evidence related to the Inauguration Day arrests.

Some of the dismissed cases have involved journalists arrested while chronicling the actions of a group of self-described anarchists.

The indictment accuses the 209 charged of using a tactic called ‘Black Bloc’ to conceal their identities by wearing black clothing and face coverings, according to CNN.

The rioters destroyed a government vehicle, assaulted a limousine driver, smashed storefront windows and committed ‘violent and destructive acts’, according to the indictment.

Just before the Inauguration Day parade started, clashes broke out between more than 400 stone-throwing protesters and riot police in McPherson Square - just blocks from the parade in honor of newly sworn-in president.

The protest broke out just blocks from where President Donald Trump was being inaugurated (pictured above)

The US Attorney's Office for the District of Columbia also announced on Tuesday that it was dropping three more cases, but did not give reason as to why the cases were being dropped

As Trump's motorcade wound its way up Pennsylvania Avenue in the parade to the White House, protesters also descended on Franklin Square Park where they graffitied a stretch limo before setting the vehicle ablaze right outside the Washington Post building.

Court paperwork from January suggests the group of rioters did more than $100,000 in damage.

Those who have been charged had their phones seized by DC Police, who have been holding on to the devices since the arrests.

Some individuals have been targeted as part of a social media investigation into their Facebook activity by police.

A search warrant would allow Facebook to give away information including 'messages, photos, videos, timeline posts, and location information', according to Facebook's guidelines.

A subpoena would include the person's 'name, length of service, credit card information, email address(es), and a recent login/logout IP address(es)'.

IP data points could show where the suspects were the day of the protests.