0 Seafair icon victim of Seattle home invasion

SEATTLE - Seattle police are investigating a home invasion robbery at the home of a local Seafair icon.

Police say an 84-year-old man was held at gunpoint by two men wearing ski masks, who they say kicked the older man when he was thrown to the ground in a scuffle.

Neighbors say the $488,000 home is owned by Sven Ellstrom, the owner of Ellstrom Manufacturing.

He’s also known locally for racing his hydroplanes at the annual Seafair.

Police say the men broke into the back of the home around 11:45 p.m. on Tuesday night.

Police say the men made off with a Rolex watch, a diamond ring and the purse of a 51-year-old woman with whom Ellstrom was sleeping at the time of the home invasion.

Some of the items found laying in the middle of the street about a block away.

Neighbors told KIRO 7 that this is not the first time Ellstrom’s home has been broken into.

Seattle police confirmed that Ellstrom was tied up and robbed at gunpoint in February of 2013.

A neighbor told KIRO 7 his own home was broken into last year a week earlier than Ellstrom's, but he says the robbers left everything alone when they realized it was not Ellstrom’s home.

"Hopefully it'll stop from this point, because it's scary. It's scary,” he said of the situation.

The neighbor says he’s also concerned about people coming and going from the house.

"A lot of unwanted activity. Cars pulling up. Females going in and out all times of the night. Cabs and limos," he described it.

He says he hopes this is the end of robbers at Ellstrom’s home.

"He could lose his life if this happens again. I'm afraid they might kill him next time. I don't know,” he said.

Anyone with information about the home invasion or who may know the identities or whereabouts of the intruders is asked to call 911 or the Seattle police robbery unit at 206-684-5535. Anonymous tips are welcome.

Want to talk about the news of the day? Watch free streaming video on the KIRO 7 mobile app and iPad app, and join us here on Facebook.