400-Watt Wall Panel Convection Heater is rated 4.0 out of 5 by 153 .

Rated 5 out of 5 by Yooper from Econo-Heat Wall Board Heater Econo-Heat 400 Watt Convection Flat Panel Space Heater with Programmable Thermostat This unit will "Convection" heat your room. You have to leave it on in order for the air to circulate in the room! Immediate heat is not and has never been the intended purpose for this product! I live in Upper Michigan where winters are very cold. These heaters work great! You need to follow the instructions in order for proper operation. Garage applications will not work well. An interior room of a home will work perfect. "TIP" Mount heater to interior wall, not a wall where outside temperatures are on the other side! This unit WILL draw cold air from the floor and heat it causing a natural rotation of air in the room! You will not be disappointed! They do work! especially if you have a "cold" room and are looking to supplement your existing heat source! Keep Warm! Summer will be back soon!

Rated 5 out of 5 by Skip from This product has been a life saver with the bitter cold weather we have had this year. I purchased three wall panel heaters hoping that they would help cut down the chill in three rooms that are extremely cold in my 100 year old house. Two of the rooms are bedrooms that are exposed on three sides to the outside, the other room is an all glass sunporch which also has exposure on three sides of the room. The difference in the temperature of the rooms now makes them livable and very comfortable. I also love the fact that the wall panels can be painted so that they blend in nicely with the room. I highly recommend this product to anyone who needs the extra warmth in a room and does not like the dryness that a space heater causes to the room and to the skin. The difference in the bedrooms has been unbelievable. The rooms are nice and toasty warm without being too hot or dry. Just right for a good nights sleep. I am thrilled with the difference in the sunroom. It is comfortable enough even with the bitter cold weather that we have experience this year to sit out in the sunroom and watch TV comfortably.

Rated 5 out of 5 by Alreeug from FABULOUS! We have had 3 econo-heaters warming up our house for over a year now. Just as they say, they heat up a small to medium sized room by about 10 degrees. They don't produce any dust and don't make any noise! We bought a small home a year and a half ago and the only source of heat is ceiling heat in the living room . We could have spent $5,000 to put in a mini ductless heating system but instead we thought we'd try out the econo-heaters first and save up for the ductless. We have been so happy with the efficiency and heat that we decided not to bother with the heat pump! We even had our first problem today, one of the heaters won't turn on. I called Econo-Heat and they said send me your receipt and address and we will get you a new one shipped in the next day or two. Great company, they really stand by their warranty! Definitely a great option for a small home!!!

Rated 4 out of 5 by Sandia from does the job! We purchased three heaters in July and I waited to post a report to make sure they worked as planned. We had two heaters installed as supplement heat in a north side bathroom in NM at high altitude. They performed as planned and heated easily two to three degrees above the central heat to keep the bathroom cozy in the early morning and at night in December. So we are satisfied. The third unit was installed in a spare bedroom on the North side. It also heated the room two to three degrees above the central heating system which is a radiant floor heating system in our house After a month of use one of the bathroom units developed a hair line crack that does not appear to interfere with the function and is barely visible. It may shorten the lifetime of the unit but for now no problem. The installation was done by a professional as we are not handy. He had no problem and did the work fast. The units look nice and are out of the way replacing space heaters.

Rated 4 out of 5 by pdb1 from Simple, good looking solution After reading through all the reviews, I decided to purchase three of these for areas of the house that were not well heated. In particular, a couple bathrooms that had no heat. In terms of performance, they do about what I expected of convective type heaters - plug them in and leave them on. These heaters work well for a smaller room, like a bathroom. One of them developed a crack and stopped working. I contacted the company by phone and left a message. the product manager phoned me back the same day. I explained what happened and emailed him some photos. He thought it must have been damaged in shipping and then the heating/cooling cycles made the crack larger which eventually breached the heating element. He immediately sent a warranty replacement. Great customer service.

Rated 5 out of 5 by chica from worked for us! Needed extra heat in a chilly alcove during the extra cold winter months we've begun experiencing. Looked at oil-filled radiators, which are very efficient, but wanted something with a low profile that could be wall-mounted not far from an outlet (comes with 6 ft of cord). At 400 WATTS it is the equivalent of four 100W incandescent light bulbs, but produces far more heat. (Read the safety instructions such as should not be under furniture, near drapes, etc., but is safe for pets and children.) It was easy and fairly quick to mount (only needed to cut down one of the four plastic insulated spacer mounts because our older plaster wall was not perfectly even). We did experience the "new" chemical smell, but with continuous use the smell was gone within 48 hours. Added bonus is that you can paint this to match the wall. Simple and aesthetically pleasing, it does not draw attention to itself. This is by far the best we could find until something better comes along. And the price (before the electric bill) is superb compared to more expensive oil-filled wall mounted radiators that take up more space. Very pleased with this simple and inexpensive solution to our short-term needs.

Rated 4 out of 5 by kj1nyc from Gets the job done I needed a heat source for a small bathroom with 3 outside walls. The temperature in the bathroom easily dipped into the teens in the winter time since it had no heat source. I bought this because it is efficient and it is low profile. So far, so good. It warms the room to a manageable temp but not anywhere near even 65 degrees b/c of the outside 3 walls. It also doesn't warm up the tile floor because of the nature of the heat. It does get very hot so be careful around it with pets or kids. Some people complain that it cracks but I haven't encountered that yet. Installed and painted in 20 minutes..needed a second person to hold it in place while I screwed it in.