Share

GUANTANAMO, Cuba, Nov 16 (acn) The participants to the 1st National Scientific Event Reflecting on the Ideals of the Cuban leader said on Thursday in Guantanamo that the best tribute to Fidel Castro's life is to study his thinking and follow his teachings.

The scientific program began on Thursday with a conference by Dr. Rafael Cervantes Martinez, Director of the Department of Marxism and History of the Ministry of Higher Education (MES) who spoke on the influence of the Marxist-Leninist ideology in the actions of the leader of the Revolution.

Cervantes Martinez said at the 1st National Scientific Event on the thinking of Fidel Castro in Contemporary Times, that one must lead a country with intelligence to face a power like the United States for so long.

He added that Fidel Castro enriched Marxism-Leninism, developing and assuming the history that ended under the premise in continuing a doctrine without betraying his principles.

Cervantes Martinez pointed out that the leader of the Revolution constitutes a permanent summary of the best of culture and universal science, as a gifted being with a profound dialectic character in the understanding of society and capable of forming an ideological and political unity of the Cuban nation.

A special panel on the importance of the revolutionary and political thinking of Fidel Castro was carried out during the first day of sessions with the participation of PhD's Eugenio Suarez Perez, Elvis Rodriguez Rodriguez and Jose Antonio Rodriguez Ben.

During the event, the panelists highlighted the confluence between Fidel and Raul Castro and their affinity in the need to guarantee unity in the construction of a political model chosen by the Cuban people.

Thursday's program included symposiums with issues like the fundamental thinking in the ideology of the Cuban Revolution in addition to the influence of National Hero Jose Marti, Heroic Guerrilla Ernesto Che Guevara and the Marxism-Leninism in the actions of Fidel Castro.

Sponsored by the 1st National Scientific Event, among other institutions, MES, the Jose Marti Cultural Society, the Cuban Pedagogical Association and the Honorific School for the Study of the Thinking and Work of Fidel Castro and the Afro-Caribbean Studies of the University of Guantanamo.