I can’t wait for Thursday evening.

Today I was granted an unexpected tour of The Ice @ Canalside after I ran into Kaitlin McGee Chmura, Assistant Project Manager of the Erie Canal Harbor Development Corporation.

As we walked around the site we could see all of the last minute details being worked out before the big day. The speakers were installed, as were the lights. The skate rental shipping crate (upcycled) was in place, as was the concierge hut. There was a food and beverage kiosk that looked like it was ready to go to. Tomorrow the hut will be serving up hot cocoa to people as they enter the site. There were pine boughs and garlands hanging all over the bridges, which will all be lit up tomorrow night. A large Christmas tree was decorated from trunk to top – that too will be lit up tomorrow.

As we walked, we noticed that the first skater to ever skate on The Ice @ Canalside took to the ice to test it out. Then another skater joined him. It was a spectacle to watch the skater as he glided underneath the bridge that we were standing on. I thought about my own skates that hadn’t seen the light of day in years. Finally, they will be broken out and used this winter.

There are some pretty cool features at Canalside that I was not aware of. On one side of the rink’s perimeter, the surface is rubber, which means that skaters can walk from the storage lockers to the Adirondack chairs to the food and beverage hut, without ever taking their skates off. On the opposite side of the rink, the aggregate stone walkways are heated, which means that snow will never accumulate. Brilliant! There will also be a large heated tent for anyone who wants to warm up.

The public areas under the bridges protect people from the wind and falling snow (it’s all lit up too). On top of the bridges there are bistro tables and chairs set up, and propane heaters are being assembled to keep people warm. This will eventually be a “beer bridge” where people will be able to sit and order a frosty brew. Food trucks will be able to pull right up to the bridge, creating an instant food court.

I also learned that there is a graphic that has been added to the ice surface of the canal rink. The graphic bares the emblem of The Aud that once stood at the site. “That spot,” Kaitlin told me. “Marks the exact spot where center ice was at The Aud. It’s a tribute to the auditorium and the history of the Sabres.”

I also discovered that the ice surface had the markings for the sport of curling. Not only can you rent skates at Canalside (600 pairs of sharpened skates), you can also rent the equipment for recreational curling. The house Zamboni will make sure that the surface is slick enough for games at any given time.

The Larkinville huts are all set up and waiting for vendors. The place is coming together quick now. Everywhere you look there are signs of life about to be infused into the site. Tomorrow is going to be a great day for Buffalo. Look at the photos and insert people!