PACKS of playing cards featuring the victims of cold case murders will be given to South Australian prisoners in the hope it prompts new leads to solve the crimes.

The American-derived playing card strategy will be coupled with letters asking for help of all people in the corrections community and advice telling criminals they may be eligible for immunity from prosecution, reduced sentences and monetary rewards for vital information.

The bold move is the latest strategy in the South Australian Police Operation Persist to solve cold case homicides and Major Crime Investigation Branch head, Detective Superintendent Des Bray says focuses on the state’s large criminal community.

“It’s not honest mums and dads and pillars of society who kill people ... it’s prisoners in our jails,’’ Det Supt Bray said.

media_camera Some of the playing cards, which feature unsolved murders, which will be given to prisoners. media_camera Some of the playing cards, which feature unsolved murders, which will be given to prisoners.

“We want to make contact with a massive section of our community who have information about these crimes.

“This is a bold initiative and a first for South Australia. However, there is evidence that targeting people in custody for information has proved to be an extremely successful strategy in solving murders and very serious crimes.

“This strategy seeks to harness the information in the criminal community to help resolve cases that have remained a mystery for up to 50 years.’’

Police worked with the Department of Correctional Service and the Commissioner for Victims’ Rights on the strategy and families of all victims featured on the cards have given their written approval.

Det Supt Bray said there will be a second release of playing cards featuring other victims from the 119 unsolved murder cases in the state.

Correctional Services head David Brown said prison staff had been included in development and training for the strategy and the prison system fully supported the move.

Families of victims have also supported the move, Commissioner for Victims’ Rights, Michael O’Connell said.

media_camera Some of the playing cards that prisoners in SA jails will receive, in the hope that it will prompt them to help with unsolved murders. Picture Roy van der Vegt

“They want to see the person responsible for the death of their loved one apprehended, prosecuted, found guilty and adequately punished,’’ he said.

“When a homicide remains unsolved, victims’ families suffer emotional and psychological stress and challenges. It is of some assistance to know that the police and correctional services are committed to investigating unsolved homicides, thus alleviating the burden on the victims’ families.’’

Suzie Ratcliffe — the sister of Joanne Ratcliffe, 11, who, along with Kirste Gordon, 4, was abducted from Adelaide Oval in 1973 and who have their images on a playing card — supported the strategy.

“The more avenues for the flow of information that are tried, the better,’’ she said.

“Families touched by such grief would be grateful for anything that can help solve these crimes.’’

Ms Ratcliffe has joined with other families of missing persons from around Australia to form the Leave A Light On Foundation which aims to raise awareness of cold case missing persons crimes. Launch events for the foundation will be held at Norwood Oval on October 21 and in Melbourne and people are encouraged to leave a porch light on that night to acknowledge the grief families of missing persons live with.