Miami police shut down roads, sealed off an area and cleared the site near an art show after security dogs reacted to a suspicious crate on Saturday morning.

But when police opened the crate outside the Art Miami tent at the Art Basel festival, they found it contained a “punk” style picture of Hillary Clinton, with pink hair, an eyebrow piercing and a studded jacket covered with pins and buttons.

Police ran the artwork through the X-ray scanners and it was deemed free from any suspicious material, the Miami Herald reported.

Fair director Nick Korniloff said that the two dogs reacted to the crate during a pre-show check shortly after 8 a.m., prompting organizers to clear the site. Both the Art Miami tent and a tent for Context, connected by a tunnel, were closed off. The package was then searched and the painting of the former Democratic presidential candidate was found inside. ... “We had to err on the side of caution,” Korniloff said. Both tents eventually reopened around 10 a.m. The painting — titled “Punk Hillary” — had been shipped with a similar portrait of President Donald Trump (called “Trump Pimp”), depicting him in a zebra-printed hat with a gold dollar-sign chain around his neck. The Trump portrait had already been removed from the crate before the security check. The false alarm delayed the opening of the tent located at One Herald Plaza for dozens of people, including event staff and attendees. After police blocked off a section of Biscayne Boulevard with their cruisers and caution tape, many lingering outside were blocked from entering the area. As a gray sky threatened rain on those waiting outside, joggers and other passersby were told to cross to the north side of 15th Street around the blocked-off area Saturday morning. Miami-Dade Transit also redirected its routes, temporarily closing the Arsht Performing Arts Center Metrobus terminal.

Gallery owner Ken Hashimoto said police still don't know why the police dogs hit on the gaudy portrait.

“They have no idea,” he said. “My thought is a Republican bomb dog.”