One thing I am certain about in Washington, D.C., these days. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), and its director James Comey, and the intelligence agencies, are no longer to be believed, as if they ever were.

The House Intelligence Committee, chaired by an establishment Republican, and as might regrettably be expected the self-serving and two faced establishment Republican Senator John McCain, along with Democrats bent on bringing down the Trump presidency, have demanded that the commander in chief cough up evidence by today that he and others on his staffs, both before and after the inauguration, were wiretapped by the Obama administration.

This ultimatum, coming from a congressional committee, senators and representatives which have known for a long time of the illegal and unconstitutional actions of the National Security Agency (NSA), the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), and the Director of National Intelligence (DNI), but covered it up, is despicable.

The bottom line is that the truth concerning these wiretaps will never be forthcoming from either the FBI, Comey, or the heads of congressional intelligence committees or the intelligence committees themselves. It will take someone in the Trump administration taking charge and “delving in with a no holds barred vengeance” with a loyal staff, perhaps Attorney General Jeff Sessions. Sessions should not and cannot recuse himself from this endeavor. Heads will need to roll!

We at Freedom Watch will also play a role through our lawsuits against the NSA, CIA, and DIA to get to the truth and seek justice, but it's high time that an uncorrupted forceful government investigation take place. Our current government outside of the White House, infested with Obama and Clinton loyalists and establishment Republicans who want to see President Trump irreparably damaged so they can run their presidential candidate against him in 2020, cannot be trusted.

They have broken away from representing the American people and now are simply in practice a “secret government” that has effectively taken over the nation for their own nefarious ends. And these ends are potentially fatal to the republic.

Larry Klayman, founder of Judicial Watch and Freedom Watch, is known for his strong public interest advocacy in furtherance of ethics in government and individual freedoms and liberties. To read more of his reports, Go Here Now.