What do you feel like when you buy a Kit-Kat, take a bite and discover there is no wafer? Do you scream and shout about the deviance of said chocolate bar? Do you throw it to the floor in disgust? Do you write to Nestle demanding they send you the missing wafer? No?

But why don’t you do that? – after all you bought the blinking thing in the first place because it has a wafer, surely? You actively desired the wafer! Otherwise you’d have plumped for a Cadbury’s Dairy Milk or maybe selected a Yorkie (only if you’re a boy, of course).

But no, you have a little smile to yourself, you enjoy the extra chocolate, and some of you might even feel the need to post on Facebook. “Just had a KitKat with no wafer – RESULT!” By the way, if this is you, please do not do this. I am happy for you really, but you’re cluttering up my feed.

So why is it that we feel just a little bit blessed when we encounter the Kit-Kat with no wafer? I guess it’s because we can enjoy quite a relaxed state of mind around snacks and can see the experience as serendipity. Sure, maybe we wanted the wafer, but actually the sweet surprise of solid chocolate makes up for all that.

So what if we took this reaction and applied it to the rest of our lives? To relationships and business? Can you imagine how happy you’d be if when things didn’t go according to plan you were even happier with the results?

It’s all about attitude, and having an open mind and not focussing so intently on getting things precisely as we want them when certain factors are outside of our control.

You must be prepared to look for opportunities in adversity and to look upon the most favourable aspects of what might otherwise be deemed a negative experience to achieve serendipity more often.

This attitude gives us the freedom to commit to undertakings without being blind to all the other opportunities that might come our way. And it gives us the valuable skill of always finding the positives in life.

“The most exciting phrase to hear in science, the one that heralds new discoveries, is not ‘Eureka!’, but ‘That’s funny…'” – Isaac Asimov

http://www.wiseism.com/like-kit-kat-no-wafer-serendipity/http://www.wiseism.com/wp-content/uploads/serendipity.jpg http://www.wiseism.com/wp-content/uploads/serendipity.jpg Wise LivingWise Mindattitude,choices,life,living wisely,luck,opportunities,positive thinking,relationships,serendipity,wisdom,wise philosophy,wise ways of livingWhat do you feel like when you buy a Kit-Kat, take a bite and discover there is no wafer? Do you scream and shout about the deviance of said chocolate bar? Do you throw it to the floor in disgust? Do you write to Nestle demanding they send you...The WiseistBeth Burgesswiseism1@gmail.comAdministratorMy name is Beth Burgess. I don't claim to be the wisest, but I am 'The Wiseist' - someone dedicated to collecting and sharing wisdom that can help people live their lives more happily and successfully. I'm also the bestselling author of "Instant Wisdom: 10 Easy Ways to Get Smart Fast",, a therapist,, coach, freelance writer, speaker, trainer, and workshop leader. And I'm still learning too.Wiseism