Country music stars Faith Hill and Tim McGraw have expanded their progressive campaign within the traditionally conservative medium by voicing support for gun control in the newest issue of Billboard Magazine.

The pair, who have been married for two decades and are promoting their first dual album, "The Rest of Our Lives," are forcefully expressing their shared political beliefs in the process.

Speaking to Billboard, McGraw says that while he enjoys hunting, he believes that using "common sense" means supporting gun control.

"Look, I’m a bird hunter -- I love to wing shoot. However, there is some common sense that’s necessary when it comes to gun control," McGraw told the magazine.

He then took aim at gun rights activists. "They want to make it about the Second Amendment every time it’s brought up," McGraw added. "It’s not about the Second Amendment."

Faith Hill quickly joined in and appeared to claim that stricter gun control laws could have prevented the mass shooting in Las Vegas. "In reference to the tragedy in Las Vegas," Hill opined, “we knew a lot of people there. The doctors that saw the wounded, they saw wounds like you’d see in war. That’s not right."

And, of course, as many celebrities are wont to do in the wake of a national tragedy, they spoke out against the National Rifle Association. "Military weapons should not be in the hands of civilians," Hill said. "It’s everyone’s responsibility, including the government and the National Rifle Association, to tell the truth. We all want a safe country."

By now, it's clear that Vegas shooter Stephen Paddock deftly navigated existing weapons restrictions in order to acquire an arsenal of weapons, including military grade guns with "bump stocks" that allowed them to shoot like automatic rifles. In the case of last week's church shooting in Texas, the government — not the NRA — failed to use common sense in enforcing its own laws, and allowed Devin Kelley to purchase guns even though he had been convicted of domestic violence.

But McGraw and Hill have become the progressive conscience of the country music world. They've long since declared their allegiance with the Democratic Party, first supporting President Barack Obama and then 2016 Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton.They even held a Nashville fundraiser for Clinton, raising thousands for the failed Democrat with a private country music concert.