Arya Stark from Game of Thrones Ygritte from Game of Thrones Margaery Tyrell from Game of Thrones Sansa Stark from Game of Thrones Melisandre from Game of Thrones Jesse and Walter White from Breaking Bad Hector Salamanca and the Cousins from Breaking Bad Skyler White from Breaking Bad Gus Fring from Breaking Bad Tortuga from Breaking Bad Hank Schrader from Breaking Bad Mike Ehrmantraut from Breaking Bad Tywin Lannister from Game of Thrones The Hound from Game of Thrones Hodor and Bran Stark from Game of Thrones Todd Alquist from Breaking Bad Don Draper from Mad Men Joan from Mad Men Roger Sterling from Mad Men Stringer Bell from The Wire Brother Mouzone from The Wire Omar Little from The Wire Chris Partlow and Snoop from The Wire Clay Morrow from Sons of Anarchy Saul Goodman and Huell from Breaking Bad Jax Teller from Sons of Anarchy Gemma from Sons of Anarchy Cosima Niehaus, Alison Hendrix, Beth Childs, Helena, and Katja Obinger from Orphan Black Trevor, Franklin and Michael from Grand Theft Auto V

It only takes him half an hour.

Each workday Adrien Noterdaem posts another popular character from pop culture – TV shows like Breaking Bad and The Wire, video games like Grand Theft Auto V – rendered in the style of everyone's favorite family from Springfield to his "Draw the Simpsons" Tumblr. It's a feat that’s possible largely because he's learned to turn out the illustrations at such a rapid clip.

"The idea was to do everything quickly, no time to waste," Noterdaem said in an email to WIRED. "It takes me around 30 minutes for one. I try not to spend more time. It's like an exercise, a goal I give to myself."

Noterdaem, who works by day as a creative director for the digital marketing agency Emakina in Brussels, has been a fan of Matt Groening's animated show for nearly 25 years, ever since he watched French-dubbed versions of the show as a kid. He's created around 120 Simpsons-esque images since April, and he recently gained notoriety with his series of Breaking Bad characters around the time of the series finale. "I didn't know at first that this stuff [would] have so much buzz around it," said the artist, who Simpsonized himself before ever taking on a pop culture figure.

Noterdaem, who made several new Simpsonized drawings for WIRED of our favorite female Game of Thrones characters (above) said he doesn't have a particular goal in mind with his character-a-day project, but he will continue to do it "as long as I enjoy it."

"I don't have a hidden agenda," he said. "Maybe I should have one. I don't know. If Matt Groening calls me, I definitely won't think long before taking a plane to L.A."

Images courtesy Adrien Noterdaem