After dinner, we headed out into the street to buy some food for the train ride. We found a stall with freshly prepared sandwiches and bought some stock. A taxi picked us up and drove us to the train station at 6pm. Sintija and Gregor, new friends, which we have met at the hotel in Hanoi went also on this train, however they had a ticket to Hoi An and we had a ticket for Hue. While we had a reserved ticket in a compartment with beds, they had to endure all night in the seat section of the train. When we got to our compartment, we realized that we will share it with Jim from USA and his wife from China. They were a really great company and we quickly fell into a debate. In the late evening we turned out the lights and quickly fell asleep. The ride towards the town of Hue was faster this way. The next day, with a one-hour delay, we arrived at the city of Hue. We said goodbye to our one-night room-mates. At the exit from the train station our ride to the hotel, which we booked beforehand, was already waiting for us. Reviews of the hotel were excellent, however it had a little bit strange name – "Google hotel". Upon arrival at the hotel, it turned out that the hotel has nothing to do with Google. :)

After a late breakfast, we headed out onto the streets. After a few steps we met Olle, a friend, who we met at the one-day trip to Halong Bay a few days earlier. We decided to go on a last drink before he returns home to cold Sweden. I really liked that a person who approaches his seventies still travels and enjoys the hustle and bustle in Vietnam. Most people at that age would probably choose to travel with a group or choose a more serene destination. After a drink, we split up, Olle his way, and we our way.

Vietnamese burn fake money, since they believe their ancestors will receive it.

River Song Huong respectively. translated Parfum river that divides the city.

Hairdresser with an interesting entrance.

The bridge is always full of scooters.

River is also used for transportation.

On the opposite bank they had an exhibition of flowers and bonsai trees.

and fishes... :)

Tools on the ground.

Flowers with a flag tower in background.

…

They had really a lot of flowers...

City of Hue is well known for the fact that it was the capital and also imperial city from 1802 till 1945. Within the city there was a forbidden city where the emperor lived. Access to the city had only concubines and his top officials. Whoever wanted to enter by force was killed on the spot. Today it is under protections of UNESCO and converted into a museum. I really recommend the visit, since the city has wonderful architecture.

The entrance does not disappoint.

There are really many details.

It is also worth to look up as the roofs are also richly decorated.

Even the emperor's premises are, of course, top notch decorated. :)

View at the main square inside the Forbidden City.

Artifacts and shadow play...

Architecture...

Open corridors also make an interesting motif.

Some are also richly decorated.

Around the city leads a walking path. It is also possible to go on a carriage ride.

Transitions between different parts of the city are separated by striking doors.

…

…

The choice of complementary colors is also interesting.

Tea house.

Another passage.

…

Rich decoration.

And the exit from the Forbidden City.

The streets are full as allways.

Waiting for the green light.