Let’s be real. Many of us drink coffee every morning of the week, so it’s not like we need one of those arbitrary national holidays reminding us to celebrate the caffeinated beverage. But, hey, any excuse to drink a cup, right?

National Coffee Day is Sept. 29, when a handful of local coffee shops are commemorating our favorite beverage with drink specials. And if none of those places strike your fancy, we’ve got many other suggestions for where to go for your espresso needs (see below!).



The coffee shop to visit on Friday is East Austin’s tiny Fleet Coffee, which has joined a nationwide effort started by coffee publication Sprudge to raise money for good causes in honor of National Coffee Day. The Night of 1,000 Pours — which actually runs all day at Fleet starting at 7 a.m. — will raise money for the Houston Food Bank, in need of donations following the devastation of Hurricane Harvey.

Fleet will donate 20 percent of its sales for the day to the Houston Food Bank. Plus, the coffee shop has some pretty sweet raffle items from local breweries, restaurants and other coffee shops that you can try and win. The items include gift cards and swag from Micklethwait Craft Meats, Nickel City, Suerte, Unit-D Pizzeria and Veracruz All-Natural.

Cuvee Coffee Bar is another place to visit on Friday. The East Sixth Street shop will have a National Coffee Day Blowout with activities all day starting when Cuvee opens at 6:30 a.m. The highlights include two hours of adult water coloring and a race that will determine who can shotgun cans of Cuvee’s Black & Blue Nitro Cold Brew the fastest.

One other Austin spot celebrating National Coffee Day is Stonehouse Coffee and Bar, which is offering $1 drip coffee and buy-one-get-one-free espresso drinks. (If you’re a teacher, you’ll be extra lucky at this South Lamar coffee shop.)

If you’d prefer a cup in the comfort of your own home, an Austin-based coffee subscription service called Atlas Coffee Club has just the National Coffee Day deal. Get your first bag free if you sign up for the service by using the code “AtlasCoffeeDay17” at checkout. Atlas takes coffee addicts on a caffeinated world tour each month, and it’s a worthy purchase.

But geez, Austin has a lot of coffee shops.



What if you want beer with your coffee? We’ve got this roundup of 10 local places where you can get both kinds of brew.

We also offer several guides to local coffee shops depending upon what part of town you want to find a cup of joe. Best Austin coffee shops near North Lamar Boulevard? Near Burnet Road? Near South First Street? Coffee lover Michael Barnes has broken it all down for us.

RELATED STORIES:

Chameleon Cold-Brew expands with line of whole-bean coffeeGreater Goods Coffee Roasters adds tasting room in Dripping SpringsAustin among top 10 ‘cities for coffee fanatics’