These powerful little girls aren't f*cking around.

For the latest ad campaign from t-shirt company FCKH8, the brand enlisted five girls between the ages of 6 and 13 to spread the word about issues regarding gender, race and sexuality.

One by one, these princess costume-clad girls address pay inequality, gender expectations and sexual assault with unexpected frankness. The clip features cursing aplenty ("Fuck that sexist shit!") amidst statistics about the pay gap, rape and violence against women.

See also: A Storied Glossary of Iconic LGBT Flags and Symbols

Editor's note: The video below, of course, features NSFW language. And kids cursing up a storm.

Of course, the advertisement is just that: an ad for a for-profit company owned by corporate branding firm Synergy Media. The shirts and sweatshirts in FCKH8's "Anti-Sexism" collection range in price from $14.99 to $36.99, and $5.00 of each purchase will go toward "kick-ass charities" that have yet to be determined.

Luke Montgomery, a spokesperson from FCKH8, tells Mashable that customers will vote on a list of charities narrowed down from Facebook suggestions on Nov. 30. Montgomery says that FCKH8 has sold more than 200,000 t-shirts since opening in 2010.

Predictably, not everyone is a fan of FCKH8's advertisement. Some have criticized it for profiting from feminist messages and slogans, referencing its controversial campaign linked to protests in Ferguson, Missouri.

In September, the brand released a video featuring children from Ferguson wearing the company's "Anti-Racism" shirts. In a similar vein to FCKH8's latest campaign, $5.00 from each purchase were donated to four anti-racism organizations.

The campaign prompted criticism for aiming to make a profit from the Ferguson protests, most notably in a Colorlines blog post on the subject.

"Everything, it seems, can distilled, packaged, bought and sold — including racism," Colorlines' Aura Bogado wrote.

FCKH8 responded with its own blog post, asking for an apology, and a promise to donate funds from the sales to Colorlines' publisher, which it declined.

According to FCKH8's website, the company has since donated $1,047 in profits to Crossroads Anti-Racism Organizing and Training, $1,000 to the Mike Brown Memorial Fund, $1,000 to the Urban League of Metropolitan St. Louis and $1,000 the NAACP.

Remember that FCKH8 is the same company that made a profit off Ferguson by selling Ferguson t-shirts. Now they want to profit off feminism. — Anne Thériault (@anne_theriault) October 22, 2014

Why create a video full of cursing kids? http://t.co/9x5p7fJR7C Answer: "http://t.co/Mmywp4HKGu is a for-profit T-shirt company..." — John Sexton (@verumserum) October 22, 2014

Hey, at least the kids are f*cking cute.

UPDATE Friday, Oct. 24, 9:17 a.m. ET FCKH8's advertisement was reinstated to YouTube on Thursday after the video hosting platform pulled it on Wednesday at about 2:30 p.m. ET.

Though we originally reported that the video was pulled from Vimeo as well, Mashable has since learned from a Vimeo spokesperson that the video was removed due to an error and was promptly reuploaded to the website.

"It seems like this censorship ... is because of user complaints about kids saying fuck," Montgomery told Mashable via email. "The video does not violate any user guidelines and with all the sexist content on both sites that is allowed to stay up, as well as content that uses this simple four-letter word, we are surprised that they chose to censor it. This censorship gets to the exact point that the girls in the video are making ... that society finds it more offensive for a girl to say fuck than they do the fact that 1 out 5 women are sexually assaulted and raped."

YouTube has not yet responded to our request for comment.