Now that Helen Hitler Thomas has been forcibly retired, more video of the interview miraculously has become available for viewing:

Here’s the “appalling” transcript:

Q: Any advice for these young people over here for starting out in the press corps? Thomas: Go for it. You’ll never be unhappy. You’ll always keep people informed, you’ll always keep learning. The greatest thing of the profession is you’ll never stop learning. Q: Today they are covering the Jewish Heritage Month. Thomas: … and meet the President. A: Any comments on Israel? We’re asking everyone today, any comments on.. Thomas: Tell them to get the hell out of Palestine. Q: Oooh. Any better comments? Thomas: Remember, these people are occupied, and it’s their land. It’s not German and it’s not Poland. Q: So where should they go, what should they do? Thomas: They can go home. Q: Where is home? Thomas: Poland. Germany. Q: So you are saying Jews should go back to Poland? Thomas: And America and everywhere else. Why push people out who have lived their for centuries? See? Q: Now, are you familiar with the history of that region and what took place? Thomas: Very much. I’m of Arab background. {It goes on for a little while with friendly banter about languages they both speak with words I can not even begin to spell.} Q: Thank you. Thomas: All the best to you (directed at the Jewish students). Go for it- go for journalism, you’ll never regret it.

Clearly, this woman is evil beyond words. The way she smiled at those Jewish kids while giving them friendly advice to enter careers in journalism so they can have fulfilling lives of learning and accomplishment when secretly, I have been assured by liberals and others, what she really wants is to transport them back to the gas ovens of the Holocaust (for the morons- see the update).

You guys got played. And by this jackass, running around doing Mexican impressions in his spare time. Does anyone still want to try to pretend she was suggesting people be time-warped back to Auschwitz? Or that her pleasantly offering advice to Jewish students was horrifying anti-Semitism at work? Anyone?

On the upside, no one is talking about the unpleasantness with the flotilla anymore.

*** Update ***

For the folks with comprehension problems, the sarcasm employed regarding her chatting with the students is directed at the foolish notion she was implying folks should head off to the ovens, not to deflect from what I have repeatedly stated were her idiotic and obnoxious remarks. There seems to be some desire in every one of these pile-ons to turn stupid remarks by someone into something altogether unforgivable. I’m reminded of the time I spent days arguing that no, Republican Bill Bennett wasn’t actually suggesting that all black babies be aborted in order to lower the crime rate.

Grow up. What Thomas said was stupid enough. She’s lost her job. There is no reason to pretend she was implying people should be sent off to Nazi Germany or Poland and be exterminated. Quit making things up and impugning those who aren’t into playing your games. I think (again, as I have stated repeatedly), the state of Israel and her citizens have every right to exist. I don’t think, however, that criticism of policies of the state of Israel are somehow verboten.