This email has also been verified by Google DKIM 2048-bit RSA key

Fwd: Jeb

From:jp66@hillaryclinton.com To: john.podesta@gmail.com Date: 2015-04-21 16:05 Subject: Fwd: Jeb

---------- Forwarded message ---------- She's going to stick to notes a little closer this am, still not perfect in her head. Sent from my iPhone On Apr 21, 2015, at 10:12 AM, Joel Benenson <jbenenson@bsgco.com> wrote: Stronger than “I am very concerned….” I will leave commenting on campaign tactics to others. What I have made absolutely clear is that corporate money and secret money have no place in our democracy and we should get rid of it once and for all.” * Yes. If she feels need to address Jeb q directly - would suggest the pivot of "I will leave commentating on campaign tactics to others, but I am very concerned about the dark money in politics and have to get rid of it once and for all." Sent from my iPhone On Apr 21, 2015, at 10:03 AM, Margolis, Jim <Jim.Margolis@gmmb.com> wrote: Agree with Robby. Do the hit, but don’t go deep into it. One thing that’s interesting… if they do TV through the Super PAC, during the ‘candidate windows’ they won’t get Lowest Unit Rate. In plain english… they will pay a big premium over candidate rates if that’s how they fund a big part of their TV effort (as reported in the article). I wouldn’t share that, but can’t believe they’d outsource here. * I would be reluctant to be vocal on this one way or another since we don't know what will happen on our side. I would have other people push that he's being bought and paid for. Strategically, anyone who saw what happened with ACT in 2004 would think twice about "outsourcing" the ground game or other parts of a campaign, but I don't think we go there w the press. On Apr 21, 2015, at 9:55 AM, Jennifer Palmieri <jpalmieri@hillaryclinton.com> wrote: So this is a thing...what do people think about Jeb using the super-pac for broader things? Sent from my iPhone Begin forwarded message: * Let us know if you have any thoughts on this arrangement Jeb is setting up, would be interested in your take ... m.apnews.com/ap/db_268798/contentdetail.htm?contentguid=V99KjLZu Download the official Twitter app here <https://twitter.com/download?ref_src=MailTweet-iOS> Sent from my iPhone The information contained in this communication is intended for the use of the designated recipients named above. If the reader of this communication is not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that you have received this communication in error, and that any review, dissemination, distribution or copying of this communication is strictly prohibited. If you have received this communication in error, please notify The Associated Press immediately by telephone at +1-212-621-1898 and delete this email. Thank you. [IP_US_DISC] msk dccc60c6d2c3a6438f0cf467d9a4938 This email is intended only for the named addressee. It may contain information that is confidential/private, legally privileged, or copyright-protected, and you should handle it accordingly. If you are not the intended recipient, you do not have legal rights to retain, copy, or distribute this email or its contents, and should promptly delete the email and all electronic copies in your system; do not retain copies in any media. If you have received this email in error, please notify the sender promptly. Thank you. -- JP jp66@hillaryclinton.com For scheduling: mfisher@hillaryclinton.com