With all the changes taking place at Roush Fenway Racing for the 2015 season, it appears veteran crew chief Jimmy Fennig may be in his final year calling shots on the pit box.

Currently serving as crew chief for Carl Edwards — who will move on to Joe Gibbs Racing next season — Fennig indicated he would likely take a behind-the-scenes role with the team once the season comes to a conclusion.

Friday at Bristol Motor Speedway, Fennig told FOXSports.com he will have to wait and see what team owner Jack Roush has in store for him next year, but added that he will most likely not be atop the pit box after the 2014 season.

Article continues below ...

Saying it would ultimately be his decision when to walk away, Fennig indicated he would most likely work with the research-and-development arm of Roush Fenway Racing.

Jack Roush said of Fennig’s future: "We don’t have a plan yet," Jack Roush said of Fennig’s future. "We haven’t heard definitively from Jimmy what his plans are, but he may be thinking about retirement. We’re just not sure."

Trevor Bayne is making his move to a full-time ride in the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series in 2015 and does not yet have a crew chief in place, so that is a possible spot for Fennig if he decides to continue working in a crew chief role.

One of the longest tenured crew chiefs in the NASCAR Sprint Cup garage, Fennig has been calling the shots atop the pit box since getting his start in 1986 with Mark Martin.

Over the next 28 years, he would go on to work with the likes of Bobby Allison, Dick Trickle, Hut Stricklin, Jimmy Spencer, again with Martin, Kurt Busch, Kenny Wallace, Jamie McMurray, David Ragan, Matt Kenseth, and has spent the last two seasons calling the shots for Carl Edwards.

Edwards said Friday that he did not know what Fennig’s plans were at the end of the season.

Fennig’s most successful season came while working with Mark Martin in 1998, scoring seven wins, 22 top fives and 26 top 10s. Working with Kurt Busch in 2004, Fennig scored his lone NASCAR Sprint Cup Series championship.