Five years separates two stories involving the same characters; one prevalent in this country, another not so well known. They are tales that go some way towards explaining why Barcelona were so forceful in their attempt to sign Philippe Coutinho but ultimately, why their attempt will prove not to be quite forceful enough.

It was in July 2012 when Pep Segura, then the technical manager at Liverpool’s academy, ended his three-year association at the club after previously being told by Liverpool’s owner, John W. Henry, he had earned a promotion.

Before Brendan Rodgers became Liverpool’s manager, Henry and Segura held a three-hour meeting and it was concluded that Segura would become Liverpool’s new sporting director, filling the administrative space left behind by Damien Comolli’s sacking a few months earlier.

Join Independent Minds For exclusive articles, events and an advertising-free read for just £5.99 €6.99 $9.99 a month Get the best of The Independent With an Independent Minds subscription for just £5.99 €6.99 $9.99 a month Get the best of The Independent Without the ads – for just £5.99 €6.99 $9.99 a month

Shape Created with Sketch. Liverpool vs Hoffenheim player ratings Show all 11 left Created with Sketch. right Created with Sketch. Shape Created with Sketch. Liverpool vs Hoffenheim player ratings 1/11 Simon Mignolet - 6 out of 10 Not his most commanding of displays in between the sticks. Could have done more for Hoffenheim's first goal and nearly conceded after a hairy moment under the high ball. 2/11 Trent Alexander-Arnold - 7 Another magical night for the youngster who thrilled with his confidence going forward down the flank. Possibly a bit eager in some of his challenges but a mature and rounded display nonetheless. 3/11 Dejan Lovren - 6 Beaten in the air for Hoffenheim's second. Could have been much tighter and disciplined in his defensive performance. Getty 4/11 Joel Matip - 6 Suffered from the same issues as his partner. Not totally in control but still got the job done. 5/11 Alberto Moreno - 6 Threatening on the front foot and assured on the back. Some of his deliveries were found wanting, though. 6/11 Georginio Wijnaldum - 6 Missed a number of clear-cut chances and got caught in possession here and there. Still, linked up with his teammates and kept the Liverpool midfield unit ticking over. Getty 7/11 Jordan Henderson - 7 Showed his captain's credentials to set up Firmino for Liverpool's fourth. Happy to do the dirty work as the men in front added the finishing touches. 8/11 Sadio Mane - 8 Explosive from the off. His pace and energy proved too much for the visitors, while his passing and vision was influential in a number of Liverpool's goals. 9/11 Emre Can - 8 A fine evening for him, too. Took his goals very well and was a constant presence in Hoffenheim's final third. 10/11 Mohamed Salah - 7 Lively all game long in his pressing and movement. Provided Liverpool with a constant source of deliveries and threatened from his position on the flank. Even snatched a goal too. 11/11 Roberto Firmino - 9 A fantastic performance from the Brazilian. Made all the right passes and his movement was exceptional. Assertive on the ball and was eventually rewarded with a well-taken goal in the second half. 1/11 Simon Mignolet - 6 out of 10 Not his most commanding of displays in between the sticks. Could have done more for Hoffenheim's first goal and nearly conceded after a hairy moment under the high ball. 2/11 Trent Alexander-Arnold - 7 Another magical night for the youngster who thrilled with his confidence going forward down the flank. Possibly a bit eager in some of his challenges but a mature and rounded display nonetheless. 3/11 Dejan Lovren - 6 Beaten in the air for Hoffenheim's second. Could have been much tighter and disciplined in his defensive performance. Getty 4/11 Joel Matip - 6 Suffered from the same issues as his partner. Not totally in control but still got the job done. 5/11 Alberto Moreno - 6 Threatening on the front foot and assured on the back. Some of his deliveries were found wanting, though. 6/11 Georginio Wijnaldum - 6 Missed a number of clear-cut chances and got caught in possession here and there. Still, linked up with his teammates and kept the Liverpool midfield unit ticking over. Getty 7/11 Jordan Henderson - 7 Showed his captain's credentials to set up Firmino for Liverpool's fourth. Happy to do the dirty work as the men in front added the finishing touches. 8/11 Sadio Mane - 8 Explosive from the off. His pace and energy proved too much for the visitors, while his passing and vision was influential in a number of Liverpool's goals. 9/11 Emre Can - 8 A fine evening for him, too. Took his goals very well and was a constant presence in Hoffenheim's final third. 10/11 Mohamed Salah - 7 Lively all game long in his pressing and movement. Provided Liverpool with a constant source of deliveries and threatened from his position on the flank. Even snatched a goal too. 11/11 Roberto Firmino - 9 A fantastic performance from the Brazilian. Made all the right passes and his movement was exceptional. Assertive on the ball and was eventually rewarded with a well-taken goal in the second half.

Rodgers, though, had other ideas, insisting his own appointment would not involve another tier of management above him. For Segura – a decent man, and someone respected inside Liverpool particularly for his contribution towards the development of Raheem Sterling – there was reasonable embarrassment when he arrived at Melwood for the start of pre-season training only to find out then there would be no place for him in the new set-up.

Despite his efforts to contact Henry about his proposed fresh responsibilities, the line of communication had gone stone cold since Rodgers’s arrival. Though he expected that plans had changed, Segura was upset and angry that he had found out this way and so, on that July morning, rather than driving to the academy in Kirkby as he had been told to by Rodgers, he resigned on the spot – though the announcement of his departure was made a month later.

Those who knew Segura best from his time at Liverpool describe him as a professional and so, his hurt was understandable considering he had been treated without the necessary level of respect. Sources in Catalonia, meanwhile, say Segura has a long memory. Now Barcelona’s general manager having returned to the club where he built his coaching reputation, and as the person overseeing player recruitment, it is told he has viewed the signing of Coutinho as a personal mission.

While Coutinho is seen as a long-term successor for the fading Andrés Iniesta, the whiplash of his own departure from Liverpool still stings and it is said he would like nothing better than to expose Fenway Sports Group’s collective stance over Coutinho’s future as total mush.

It was a small but significant detail when Fenway released a “definitive” statement earlier this month, outlining that Coutinho would not be sold, this was not a statement released by Liverpool FC but by its ownership group, a statement, indeed, that was not signed off by any person in particular as they often are when something important is announced

Hour-by-hour, day-to-day, week-to-week, Henry does not have much involvement in the decision-making processes at the club and instead, key issues are dealt with by Jürgen Klopp, Michael Edwards, Liverpool’s sporting director, and Mike Gordon, Fenway’s president.

Henry only intervenes when he really needs to and this was one of his calls. Before Coutinho had submitted his transfer request, Henry knew that his scan, taken on Tuesday August 8, for mysterious back strain had returned without obvious signs of injury. He knew as well that two days later a 3pm meeting involving Edwards and Coutinho’s representatives had not gone well at all. Any owner of a well-run football club should also be informed and be able to imagine what might follow when a star player signs a new five year-contract – as Coutinho did in January – but proceeds to only agree a short-term lease on his home, especially when it has already been reported that Barcelona are interested in him.

Those that have dealt with Henry regularly know how he is capable of brain lapses, instances where he has appeared completely engrossed on a subject one moment and unreachable the next. Particularly relating to Liverpool matters, perhaps living on the other side of an ocean while running a business empire where Anfield forms only a part of his thoughts contributes towards the way he approaches things. Perhaps, indeed, this is why Segura found himself isolated very quickly from what seemed a position of promise.

Henry’s distance from Merseyside has not helped in the past because he has not been around to cast judgements for himself. He has instead relied on the opinions of his appointments, which have been bad ones too often – meaning that he has only acted when it has been too late, contributing towards a generally negative impression of his and Fenway’s intentions.

Having decided that Coutinho would stay, he could not afford to back down particularly when the transfer market did not map out exactly the way Liverpool or its febrile supporter base would have wanted in terms of incomings. Fenway have been determined to change Liverpool’s reputation and by not relenting to Coutinho’s wishes, for the time being at least, it sends a message to their own players as well as rivals that this is not a selling club.

Any other outcome would have been received as deception and from then on, it is hard to see how any of the messages coming out of Liverpool would ever be trusted again.

Keep up to date with all the latest news with expert comment and analysis from our award-winning writers