An Atlanta judge has granted Gucci Mane credit for nearly a year of time served in a gun possession charge stemming from a September arrest last year according to TMZ.

Gucci Mane was sentenced to serve 39 months at a hearing in August after reaching a plea deal on the weapons charges, avoiding a potential decade-long sentence in the process. Despite his being arrested in September 2013, Mane’s sentence was scheduled to begin at the time of the sentencing hearing itself. As a result of the latest court ruling, the eleven months Gucci served between September and his sentencing hearing last month will now be subtracted from the 39 month punishment. TMZ reports that Gucci is now slated for release in December of 2016.

As a part of the plea deal executed in August, Gucci Mane’s lawyer requested the rapper to be entered into a drug rehabilitation program and to be held on the West Coast, away from his hometown affiliates. “He understands he has some work ahead of him and his goal is to bring resolution to this case and get back to performing,” Gucci Mane’s lawyer, Drew Findling, said according to Rolling Stone. “He doesn’t want anything to distract him. He wants to do anything to get back to the work place and the work place is the stage.”

In September of last year, Gucci Mane was arrested after police found the 34-year old rapper with a 45-caliber pistol and eight bullets. At the time of his arrest, Mane was already serving probation for a previous felony charge.

Gucci Mane released his I Am Trap mixtape on August 31. HipHopDX gave the release three out of five stars, noting, “the best moments on I Am Trap would sound like welcome additions to his most critically acclaimed tapes, like Trap Back, Writing’s On The Wall, or The Cold War mixtape trilogy. With a guest spot from Wale on one of the tape’s standout tracks, ‘Used To It,’ Gucci states in the chorus ‘Imma keep doin’ what I’ve been doing.’ Looks like Guwop will be releasing much more ‘free Gucci’ in the foreseeable future.”

RELATED: Gucci Mane “I Am Trap” Release Date, Cover Art, Tracklist, Download & Mixtape Stream