A not-so-shocking new study out from Pew Research found that Americans – or, more specifically, Millennials – are big whopping hypocrites when it comes to how much they actually care about the environment.

Pew found that three out of four Americans say they’re concerned about the planet, citing a survey last year that found 74 percent agreed that “the country should do whatever it takes to protect the environment."

On top of that, a majority 55 percent recently told Pew they believe the environment should be one of the top issues addressed by President Trump and Congress.

But it turns out that while paying lip service to Mother Earth while pointing an accusatory finger at the government is a political talking point played on repeat, that concern stops at most people's front doors. Pew notes:

Among U.S. adults, 75% say they are particularly concerned about helping the environment as they go about their daily lives, according to a 2016 Pew Research Center survey. But only one-in-five Americans say they make an effort to live in ways that help protect the environment “all the time.”

And if that weren’t shocking enough, check out the age demographic Pew found to be the most environmentally friendly…

Those ages 65 and older are three times as likely as those ages 18 to 29 to say they make this effort all the time (36% vs. 12%). Millennials (currently 18 to 36 years old) are also somewhat less likely than older generations to view themselves as environmentalists, with 32% saying this, versus at least four-in-ten among older generations, the Center found in a 2014 survey.

On top of that, Pew noted that older people are actually more likely that Millennials to say they recycle often, and only 32 percent of all Americans say it bothers them when people throw away things that could have been recycled.

Evidence to back up this study isn't hard to find. Take, for example, the so-called "environmental" protesters who set up camp in North Dakota to protest the Dakota Access Pipeline. After weeks of ranting against the threat oil pipelines pose to local water sources, the massive hoarde vacated the campground, leaving more than 835 dumpsters worth of trash, abandoned cars, and about a dozen live puppies behind. It took $1.1 million and about a month just to clean up the mess before it could seep into the local river.

Similarly, the Women's March on Washington back in January featured thousands of protesters railing against Trump's "anti-environment" agenda. Their signs, along with their water bottles, and miscellanous debris, ended up scattered all over the streets of D.C.

Looks like when it comes to protecting the environment, more Americans would rather chuck money toward fixing “climate change” and force coal miners into joblessness than actually practice what they preach.