This game was eerily similar in the way that it ended, minus the helmet catch, that it almost seemed like you were watching a replay of the Super Bowl from 2007. Brady led the Patriots to a late touchdown to put them up 20-17 with only 1:36 remaining on the clock. "I'd rather be down three with a minute thirty (left) than up by four with a minute-thirty with Tom Brady, with their offense on the field." Giants quarterback Eli Manning said. "You like those opportunities to go win the game."

The game was a back and forth battle all day long, with not much in the way of offensive playmaking to be seen for most of the day as it was only 10-3 entering the fourth quarter. That's when things started to get exciting. The Patriots had started their drive in the third quarter, and finished it with a 5 yard TD pass to Aaron Hernandez to tie the game at 10 less than a minute into the final period. New England then got the ball back and took the lead on a 45 yard Gostkowski field goal.

The fourth quarter made up for all of the rest of this game. The Giants then go on a drive of their own that climaxed with a 10 yard TD pass to Mario Manningham. Brady took it back, and then leda final charge down the field, and celebrated as they thought they were up for good as Brady threw to TE Rob Gronkowski on three straight plays before falling down in the end zone with a 20-17 lead.

The final drive did have some similarities to the Super Bowl winning drive. Manning threw another heave down the middle of the field, and it was again caught for a 28 yard gainer by another guy wearing #85. This time it wasn't "Helmet Catch" hero David Tyree, it was big TE Jake Ballard who was thought to be only good for blocking. After a pass interference call in the end zone on Patriots corner Sergio Brown that gave the Giants the ball at the 1 yard line. It took them three plays, but on the third he hit Ballard again for the winning score with just 15 ticks left on the clock.

The Giants players were feeling a bit euphoric back in the locker room as the lifted up coach Tom Coughlin on their shoulders. "We got a little carried away,' Justin Tuck said about it afterwards. "Considering how good that team is and what they've done here in the last 20 games, it was a big win, and to win it in the fashion that we won it, it brings back memories."

The Giants can't get too caught up in the feeling because they have to travel to the west coast this week to play, who some pundits think, the second best team in the NFC right now, the San Francisco 49ers. They've also got a daunting schedule left after that game as well as they will face off against Philadelphia, New Orleans, Green Bay and then Dallas again, with the Saints and Cowboys being road games.

The Patriots while suffering they're second straight defeat are still in pretty good position. "We've got half a season to go," Brady said. "We'll see what our team's made of this week." As they are sitting in a three way tie for first place at 5-3 with the Bills and Jets, they arepreparing toface a stiff test this week as they travel to New York to face the Jets. Theschedule eases up for the most part as their most challenging game will be at Philly in late November, then a Buffalo rematch on New Year's Day. If they can find a way to beat the Jets, the division is theirs for the taking.