Get the biggest daily stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

A DIRTY tenant turned his home into a rubbish tip by cramming it with more than 1000 burger and Kentucky Fried Chicken cartons.

Landlord Chris Dowling couldn't believe his eyes, or nose, when confronted with the squalor the man had left behind.

The mountain of burger cartons, bags and other rubbish in the living room of the £100,000 flat was so huge that Chris struggled to force his way through it.

More McDonald's and KFC cartons were piled high around the bed.

It's thought the tenant had eaten his way through £5000 worth of fast-food.

And when Chris made it to the bathroom, he found that the tenant had left a giant heap of cigarette ends on the sink.

Chris, 57, said: "In 15 years of running properties I've never come across anything like this - and we see all sorts.

"The tenant had also been smoking without opening windows and there were nicotine stains dripping from the walls.

"It smelled like a giant ashtray. I can't imagine how anyone can live like that."

Chris's tenant, a mechanic, moved into the flat in Slough, Berkshire, in 2005 and always paid his £450-a-month rent.

His filthy lifestyle was exposed when bailiffs turned up at the flat to chase him for unpaid council tax. They alerted Chris, who went to inspect the flat but found the locks had been changed.

He wrote to the tenant telling him to get out and spoke to him on the phone last week.

Chris said: "He told me he had quit the flat. I told him the council were after him and he said he would sort that out."

Chris had to hire specialist cleaners who took a full vanload of rubbish from the studio flat. He has also had to pay to have the property redecorated.

But he insisted: "It hasn't put me off renting places out. I'll just take the hit."

Don Gorske, of Wisconsin, says he has eaten 23,000 of Big Macs burgers in 36 years. He has also kept every receipt.