Frankie Edgar has campaigned in the cage and outside of it for another featherweight world title shot for what must feel like forever to him. He was crushed to have gotten passed over again when UFC 189 needed a last-minute replacement to face Conor McGregor after champion Jose Aldo pulled out with a broken rib.

"The Answer" made sure to be on hand to watch UFC 189 on Saturday night in Las Vegas, and also to greet and challenge the new interim champion immediately afterward.

"I do [feel like I’m next in line for a shot]. Actually, I went up to the cage, I told Conor ‘Congrats,’ and why don’t me and him do it before Aldo?" Edgar revealed to Megan Olivi late Saturday night at the MGM Grand Garden Arena. "Because, who knows how long Aldo is going to take. Let me and him figure this out."

Article continues below ...

Edgar is right that it is unknown how long the champion Aldo will be out. However, there’s no telling when McGregor, who has been rumored to have an injured knee for weeks and begins filming a season of TUF as a coach alongside Urijah Faber this week, will be ready to fight again, either.

Unfortunately for Edgar, he may have to wait, or fight on, for some time before getting another chance at a UFC title. Should he get to face McGregor, Edgar is confident he’ll do what Chad Mendes could not.

"I think Chad, it was going his way, he was able to get takedowns," Edgar said in analyzing the UFC 189 main event.

"Credit to Conor, he was able to stay composed. He was able to get back on his feet. Chad seemed to slow down, get tired taking a fight on short notice like that, and Conor capitalized.

"He wasn’t flashy or anything [on the ground]. He was able to, I guess, keep Chad at bay, but he was eating some big shots. I was just impressed how when he did get back to his feet, he was composed."

Edgar believes he can offer more movement and conditioning than Mendes. "I move a little more than Chad," he said.

"I think my takedowns are there like his, and I feel like I got good ground and pound. I don’t really slow down too much, you know?"

Indeed he does not. Edgar doesn’t know if telling the UFC brass he’s ready and deserving of another title fight will make a difference, but he’s positive he’ll be ready if and when it comes.

"Aww man, I feel it’s like beating a dead horse," he said.

"They know what I want and I seem to not get what I want, but my time is going to come."