Bryan Bravo, 19, is shown on a stretcher after he broke into a Santa Ana home on Friday, Sept. 4, 2015.

Two home invasion suspects chose the wrong house to target. The homeowner, who is trained in martial arts, turned the tables on the criminals, even shooting one of them.The incident took place at Erickson Dumaual's home in the 2500 block of West Manly Avenue around 4 a.m. Friday.Dumaual said two burglars came into his bedroom through an open sliding door, pointed a gun at his head and demanded money."Fifty-fifty, it was a struggle. I didn't know whether I was going to die," Dumaual said.Wanting to protect his sister and his 14-year-old nephew in the house, Dumaual took action."I saw the gunman turn his head, I attacked. I went for the gun. I have training in Krav Maga, so it didn't scare me at all," Dumaual said.Dumaual pushed the gunman against a window, shattered the glass, and then took the fight outside.After fending off both men, he took the gun. One suspect ran, but the one who lost the gun wanted to keep fighting."He never fired a shot on me, but I took that gun and he was going for that gun again, so I had to defend myself," Dumaual said.He shot the suspect in the leg, when the man tried to run. Dumaual pushed him into the pool and told him to stay put. When the suspect jumped out of the pool, Dumaual shot him again."He wanted to run," Dumaual said. He said the suspect kept saying, "I'm sorry," and tried to flee."No, you're staying right here buddy. So I tried to subdue him even more," he said.Officers arrived and took 19-year-old Bryan Bravo into custody. Dumaual's nephew took a photo of him on a stretcher.Police say the two suspects might have robbed someone earlier in the morning."The description matches. They were on a bike. Our victim was walking down the street, had a backpack, cellphone and money," Cpl. Anthony Bertagna said about that incident.As for Dumaual, he escaped with a few scratches and a cut on his foot from stepping on glass. He said these men picked the wrong house."He deserved it. He deserved every bit of it. I'd do it again if it happened again," he said.Police said Bravo is a known gang member with a long criminal history. He is expected to survive.If you have any information on the second suspect, you're urged to call Santa Ana police.