With Father's Day approaching, it's nice to know we helped out one of the good guys.

Mesa resident Troy Guelich, 43, turned to Call 12 For Action after the Department of Economic Security failed to erase the balance due on his child-support account.

The divorced father of two daughters was laid off in 2009. Before that, he had always paid his child-support payments in full and on time.

But that was tough to do while he was out of work for nearly a year.

The Department of Economic Security took over Guelich's child-support payments from the court because they were paying him unemployment benefits. But the DES decreased his child-support payments for three of those months.

When Guelich found a new job, he caught up, paying the outstanding amount in full.

Shortly after that, Guelich started receiving notices from the DES claiming he was delinquent on his account.

Then, he found out through the courts and the DES website that he had actually overpaid by thousands of dollars.

He brought it to the attention of the DES, but Guelich claims no one listened.

However, within three weeks of Call 12 For Action's involvement, Troy got his nearly $3,000 balance erased.

DES sent us this statement:

DES works with all noncustodial parents to assist them in meeting their obligations to their children. Mr. Guelich is no exception.

It's important to understand that Arizona has two child-support systems: DES and the local clerks of court (non-DES). Cases managed by the local courts do not have the same accounting requirements as DES. When cases from the local court apply for DES services after years of being managed by the local courts, DES relies on current court orders, signed by judges and the parties to the case, to establish the child support debt. The parties to a child support case have the opportunity to challenge their child support debt and to present payment information in court. DES enforces the court's ordered child support.

That doesn't answer the question as to why Guelich's case was mishandled. Although he loves his daughters and will continue to provide for them, Guelich is still angry. He says he was treated like a deadbeat dad when he is far from that.