Armor Your VR Machine Prepare yourself well to enjoy the impressive world of Virtual Reality. Before that, you have to make sure everything is qualified, including hardware, software and drivers. Motherboard is the key to connect every critical components and ASRock's VR Ready motherboards are definitely the one you're looking for. The premium qualify is assured by rigorous testing during development. The sturdy components and rock-slid performance makes you completely immersive in the VR scenario. Users can be assured to experience VR enjoyments without any compatibility problems.

Triple Monitor

Digi Power

ELNA Audio Caps

A-Tuning

Live Update & APP Shop

Graphics, graphics and even more graphics! You've demanded for more eye candy, so this motherboard supports Triple Monitor. You may choose up to three display interfaces from the rear i/o to connect monitors and use them simultaneously without installing another graphics card.*Supported with A-Series APUs only.Unlike traditional motherboards that use analog power, this motherboard uses a next generation digital PWM (Pulse-Width Modulation) design, which provides CPU Vcore voltage more efficiently and smoothly, so that the stability and lifespan of the motherboard is greatly enhanced.Who says high quality audio is only available on high-end motherboards? ASRock applied ELNA audio capacitors on mainstream and entry-level motherboards! Compared with traditional solid caps, the leakage current of ELNA audio caps is merely 3uA. This is the key to reduce noise level significantly and satisfy even the pickiest audiophiles.A-Tuning is ASRock's multi purpose software suite with a new interface, more new features and improved utilities.ASRock Live Update & APP Shop is designed for your convenience. We provide various apps and support software for users to download. You can also easily optimize your system and keep your motherboard up to date with ASRock Live Update & APP Shop.The specification is subject to change without notice in advance. The brand and product names are trademarks of their respective companies. Any configuration other than original product specification is not guaranteed.The above user interface picture is a sample for reference. The actual user interface may vary with the updated software version.