Memphis Depay may have stolen all the headlines as Manchester United returned to European competition against Club Bruges on Tuesday night, but there was further cause for optimism at Old Trafford.

Summer singing Bastian Schweinsteiger, a half-time substitute for Michael Carrick, showed United fans what they could expect from the World Cup-winning midfielder this season.

In his 45-minute cameo the former Bayern Munich star made more passes than any of the Bruges players made in the entire 90 minutes.

Bastian Schweinsteiger was introduced at half-time against Club Bruges on Tuesday night

The Germany midfielder attempted more passes in 45 minutes than any Bruges player did in 90 minutes

The 31-year-old Germany international even put his own team-mates to shame during the 3-1 first-leg victory over the Belgians as United bid to return to the Champions League group stage.

Schweinsteiger attempted a total of 54 passes - more than Wayne Rooney managed in 84 minutes, Memphis Depay in 90 minutes and Adnan Januzaj in 72 minutes.

Only fellow new signing Morgan Schneiderlin came close to matching Schweinsteiger's impressive figures. The France midfielder attempted 90 passes in the whole game, which averaged out per half still falls nine short of the German.

For Bruges, Oscar Duarte made the highest number of passes. The Costa Rican defender, who helped shut out England at the 2014 World Cup, tried to find team-mates on 44 occasions.

Carrick made way for Schweinsteiger as Louis van Gaal admitted he wanted to build up German's fitness

PASSES ATTEMPTED Manchester United Morgan Schneiderlin (90 mins) - 90 Daley Blind (90 mins) - 69 Juan Mata (90 mins) - 68 Bastian Schweinsteiger (45 mins) - 54

United fans have been waiting patiently to see more of marquee signing Schweinsteiger, who has been eased in gently over the first weeks of the season by manager Louis van Gaal.

The Dutchman revealed after Tuesday's win in their Champions League qualifier that he brought Schweinsteiger on to build up his fitness.

'It was a tactical substitute but also I have to build up the games of Bastian Schweinsteiger because we need him in our team. He came to the USA (on the pre-season tour) out of a holiday. I'm sorry but then you are not fit.'

United scored in the final few seconds against Bruges when Marouane Fellaini met Depay's superb cross after the Holland forward announced himself to the Old Trafford crowd with two superb strikes.