SAN JOSE — A two-hour discussion by the police union about whether to admonish their boss waffled briefly before ending with an “overwhelming” decision against such a move Tuesday, with leaders saying it would have been an unnecessary distraction from more pressing issues.

Although Chief Chris Moore avoids a dreaded “no confidence” vote, union officials stressed their decision should not be viewed as support for Moore’s leadership or the City Council they’ve clashed with over layoffs, cuts and officer pay and benefits.

“There isn’t a lot of confidence in Chief Moore and his leadership style,” said Jim Unland, president of the San Jose Police Officers’ Association. “But we think (a no-confidence vote) is a distraction from the real issues that need to be addressed in City Hall.”

Unland acknowledged that Moore doesn’t have control over the budget crises that have led to the elimination of divisions such as a dedicated gang-suppression unit and proposed reductions in the fraud/burglary unit and traffic-enforcement teams. But he said the chief of the 1,060-officer force is not fully using his platform as the city’s top cop.

“What isn’t beyond his control is being vocal,” Unland said. “We’re telling him to get off the bench and into the game.”

Moore responded to the morning’s developments by pledging to more effectively communicate the ways he advocates for his rank and file.

“I completely understand and share the frustrations of our officers,” Moore said. “The sentiment is clear: I need to spend more time working with them explaining the steps I’m taking to support them.”

Upward of 300 members attended the morning general meeting — widely acknowledged as heavier-than-usual turnout — following news coverage of the potential symbolic slap of Moore. Word got out last week that Officer Howard Johnson Jr., a union board member, placed an item on the meeting agenda to spark a discussion about a no-confidence vote.

“I’m not disappointed,” Johnson said after the meeting. “The message is here. The message is being brought out to the public.”

Staff writer John Woolfolk contributed to this story. Contact Robert Salonga at 408-920-5002. Follow him at Twitter.com/robertsalonga.