A special “tax” for Jews.

Praise for Adolf Hitler.

References to “camps” for Jews.

And threats galore.

A time out of history, before World War II’s death and destruction rained down on Europe?

It’s all being heard today in Turkey, as anti-Semitism reaches new highs and Muslims appear to be organizing for a new caliphate, according to the Middle East Media Research Institute.

The organization reported Friday that a recent survey in Turkey found that in just 24 hours, on July 17-18, 27,309 Turkish Twitter users sent 30,926 Turkish-language tweets in support of Hitler’s genocide against the Jews.

The report said anti-Semitic “incitement” by Turkish government officials is at levels not seen in years.

Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan calls Israel more barbaric than Hitler, and the media, which supports his party, regularly accuse Turkey’s Jews of “treason.” Other accusations include connecting Jews with the use of Ebola as a biological weapon and a professor tweeted about sending Jews to Treblinka.

Treblinka was one of Germany’s notorious World War II death camps.

See Turkey being transformed into Hitler’s Germany in Joel Richardson’s “End Times Eyewitness.” History is repeating itself as Turkey prepares to become the center of the Islamic Caliphate once again.

Calling anti-Semitism is an accepted part of Turkish government discourse, MEMRI also noted that in protests after the May mine collapse in Soma, Erdogan scuffled with a miner, calling him “sperm of Israel.”

In September, while Erdogan was insisting to the Council on Foreign Relations that neither he nor his government was anti-Semitic, members of his party back home were tweeting praise for Hitler, and shops in Istanbul were displaying signs reading ‘No Admittance To Jewish Dogs,” MEMRI reported.

The MEMRI report cited the writings of Muslim columnist Ibrahim Tenekeci of the daily Yeni Safak, who penned “Of Men and Jews.”

Read the fascinating report by bestselling author Ray Comfort on how Hitler misused Christianity in his rise to power that allowed him to exterminate millions of Jews, in “Hitler God and the Bible.”

He cited the work of 1960s writer Nurettin Topcu, who wrote that Jews are “the eternal curse of mankind.”

“‘No doubt, Allah has created the Jewish tribe as the curse to mankind,'” Tenekeci quoted. “‘The Jewish tribe has been sent to the world in order to destroy every good thing, every strong foundation, and all liberating truths. … It is an instinct of the Jew to do evil to men and to humanity. … The Jew cannot live without evil and troublemaking.'”

MEMRI also cited the writings of Karuk Kose, whose work also appears in the Yeni Akit.

“There is no way to remedy the loss of lives [in the Gaza war], but until we arrive at the ‘great revenge time’ we must keep the pain alive in our hearts and rebuild Gaza with no delay, and remedy [the Gazans’] material losses.

“The damages total $8 billion. This is a big number for a little territory such as Gaza … and its reconstruction will take 20 years,” the commentary continued. “Naturally the money needed to rebuild Gaza will come from the world’s Muslims. … With Muslim aid, Gaza will be rebuilt – until the ‘herd of murderers’ attack once again and ruin it.

“So should we not build Gaza out of fear that it will be destroyed again, and should we allow tens of thousands of our Gazan brothers to live in the Stone Age? Of course not! However, it is time for ‘Palestine-loving Muslims’ and the ‘father of Gaza’ [i.e. Erdogan] to put an end to this vicious cycle. It is time to make the ‘culprits’ and the ‘culprits’ helpers’ pay for the damages. ”

The idea being promoted was a “Gaza Fund” tax for all Jews and non-Jewish companies doing business with Israel.

“Since it is they who destroyed, let them pay for reconstruction.”

Ali Ihsan Goker, who teaches at Bilecik University in Turkey, tweeted recently, “Treblinka will be ready soon; [we are] constructing the railway to transport Jews at the moment.”

And the report notes that Bulent Yildirim, the leader of a pro-terror organization called IHH, said it was “increasingly difficult to restrain” the young members of the group “from attacking Jews.”

An alarming rise in anti-Semitism in Turkey has been noted by the U.S. State Department’s special envoy for combating anti-Semitism, Ira Forman, the Jerusalem Post reported.

“We are concerned when civil society or political leaders call on the Jewish community to denounce Israel,” Forman said.

“And we are concerned when we hear that someone posted a sign reading ‘to be demolished’ on Istanbul’s Neve Shalom synagogue,” Forman said.

Turkey’s president, Erdogan, and his Islamic party have been in power for a decade in Turkey. Of late, he has dramatically reduced interaction with Israel, even though they were close strategic partners.

He’s also accused Israel of “murdering babies.”

Further, Haaretz.com reported over the summer that regarding Turkey, “the level of hate speech directed at Jews has hit dangerous levels.”

Commentator Louis Fishman said, “For over a decade, I have lived on-and-off in Turkey, watching Turkish society diversify along with the new freedoms it enjoyed during the first years of Erdogan’s tenure.

“However, over the years, peoples’ comments and the Islamist press reminded me of the latent anti-Semitism there.”

He said the recent eruption was “characterized by widespread praise for Hitler in the press and social media.”