UPDATE: And the winner is...

Jennifer Baumgardner Esquire

For the past week, a field of dearly and prematurely departed television shows have faced off in an epic battle to become the series deemed most worthy of resurrection. (Yeah, we said epic. Come on: Every epic battle in history has been decided via online voting.) In the process, some very worthwhile dramas and comedies lost their dogged fights, occasionally in unexpected upsets. Party Down, Deadwood, Chappelle's Show, Freaks and Geeks: You all tried your best. We know you did. But now it's down to the finals, the championship game, the Thrilla in Cancelled Showville-a... or something.

In one corner, we have upstart seven-seed Pushing Daisies, the 2007-2009 ABC series created by premature cancellation icon Bryan Fuller and starring Lee Pace, which exploded with the colorful weirdness of a Twin Peaks, the open-heartedness of a Friday Night Lights, and all the supernaturally-tinged mystery-solving of... well, a lot of shows on TV that are/were never quite as inventive as Pushing Daisies. It's long been a niche favorite, but as more time passes, perhaps the attachment to Ned, Emerson Cod, and Olive Snook is only growing stronger. We can only assume so, since Pushing Daisies pushed its way to victory in round after round, knocking off two top seeds in Chappelle's Show and Freaks and Geeks. (Admittedly, we wildly underestimated its fandom.)

But before winning it all, the Pie Man will have to get past Firefly, an even shorter-lived drama but one created by Mr. Joss Whedon, and starring cult faves Nathan Fillion and Alan Tudyk, among others. Infused with Whedon's trademark, whip-smart dialogue, a Star Wars-esque sensibility, and more than one relationship that crackled with sexual tension, the 2002-2003 sci-fi Western has not only earned a reputation as one of the most unjustly terminated shows ever, it also inspired a movie follow-up, an untold number of crocheted Jayne hat knock-offs, and an ongoing, admirable fundraising effort for Equality Now dubbed Can't Stop the Serenity. The hardcore Firefly fans, aka Browncoats, have proven again and again that they, too, can't be stopped. So can the, um, Pie Holers (that seems like a good name for Pushing Daisies fanatics, right?) really stand in their way?

You have until 11:59 p.m. EST on Sunday, when voting ends in this final round of Esquire's TV Reboot Tournament, to decide.