Widnes Vikings have entered into an exciting partnership with the RFL that will see the club play a leading role in the development of the Cumbria Regional Academy.

The Academy provides a career path for the elite young talent in West Cumbria and the link with Widnes Vikings will provide those players with access to the benefits that come from being part of a Super League club culture.

Widnes Vikings will also work closely with all the stakeholders in Cumbria, including Barrow Raiders, Whitehaven and Workington Town, to enhance the player development pathways in the region for the benefit of the professional and community games.

Widnes Vikings Head of Youth Phil Finney commented: “We are looking forward to working with the RFL and the Cumbria Regional Academy on a series of initiatives that will

benefit the whole sport.

“We think that we can make good use of our experience and expertise alongside the vast local knowledge within the staff and volunteers already in place in the region to provide a pathway to England, Super League and the Championships for an increasing number of Cumbrian players.

“A crucial element will be the development of strong working relationships with all of the key stakeholders in the region, including the professional and community clubs and the local schools.

“We want to forge strong working partnerships with Cumbrian community clubs and their staff and volunteers to provide further opportunity for the players and coaches across the county.”

Widnes Vikings Chief Executive James Rule added: “We are very proud of the fact that this year we received the highest possible grading in the independent Academy Audit.

“We have developed an outstanding Academy environment and working alongside the RFL we want to utilise that best practice to great effect to develop a genuine partnership with the Regional Academy and with the wider Cumbrian region.”

RFL Director of Performance and Coaching Jon Roberts said: “The Cumbria Regional Academy has made huge strides in the last two years and this four-year partnership with Widnes Vikings provides a terrific opportunity to make even more significant progress.

“Cumbria is an important region for the sport and it is essential that we do all we can to create an environment that allows every player to realise his potential. The involvement of Widnes Vikings will help us achieve that objective.

“The partnership helps create a clear pathway to the England team for every young player in Cumbria: whilst not all of them will make it that far, a great many will develop into players for Barrow, Whitehaven, Workington Town, the Super League clubs, including Widnes, and community clubs across the county.”