A Charleston County probate judge Irvin G. Condon began accepting marriage license applications for same-sex couples on Wednesday morning. The judge was asked Thursday morning to refrain from releasing those licenses until the Supreme Court made a decision on the issue.



This latest move comes as the same-sex couple from Charleston who were the first to apply for a marriage license continues to wait for their license following the lapse of a 24-hour waiting period.



Charleston County Councilwoman Colleen Condon, 44, and her fiance, 43-year-old Nichols Bleckley, who were at the Supreme Court and the Charleston County marriage license office, respectively, said they weren't surprised to hear the latest news, but they were disappointed.



"This is exhausting," Condon said. "I'm an elected official, so luckily I'm used to dealing with the press. I'm a lawyer, so at least I'm used to dealing with the law, but this is overwhelming."



Condon went as far to compare Attorney General Alan Wilson to former Alabama Gov. George Wallace, who famously and personally blocked several African-American students from entering the University of Alabama during the height of the civil rights movement.



"While there is no one physically standing in the way of giving us our marriage license, Alan Wilson as far as I'm concerned is doing the exact same thing," Condon said. "He might as well be standing in front of the door of this very building telling me I can't get my marriage license. It's the exact same thing."



Wilson asked the courts for a decision late Wednesday evening after Judge Condon accepted 25 same-sex marriage applications with approval for a license following the waiting period.



Condon also filed a motion against Wilson on Thursday morning."I was certainly disappointed Alan Wilson decided to get involved and say somehow the [Bradacs vs. Haley] case about benefits -- I love it -- benefits for a state trooper are the same as my right to get married, but that's different from getting a marriage license from the state of Virginia," Condon said.



Copyright 2014 WIS. All rights reserved.