

The Lich King commands you

Looking to start collecting the new Heroes of the Storm action figures? Well, look no further!

Here’s all of the information we currently have on this exciting new figure line.

Why should you care?

Well let’s see here.. BECAUSE THIS IS A BLIZZARD FAN’S DREAM COME TRUE! Aside from the World of Warcraft toy line manufactured by DC Unlimited (and since ended in 2012) there really aren’t many good Blizzard figures out there. Good luck finding the original StarCraft figures.

Heroes of the Storm (the game) is Blizzard's take on the "MOBA" (Multiplayer Online Battle Arena) or "Hero Brawler" genre. You can think of it like Blizzard’s All-Stars. The game takes all of Blizzard’s best characters from all of their best properties (Starcraft, Warcraft, Diablo) and brings them together with a unified design aesthetic. The in-game characters feel like awesome action figures and now they have become awesome action figures!

Manufacturer:

NECA

Who is NECA?

NECA is an American manufacturer of licensed action figures and collectibles. They have built a reputation on having highly detailed figure work at consumer-friendly price points. Their ongoing Predator line is insane. You can check out their current offerings at necaonline.com



What figures are out now?

Series 1, Wave 1 (released September 2015)

Nova Terra

Illidan Stormrage

Series 1, Wave 2 (released December 2015)



Arthas

Tyrael

Series 1 Deluxe (released December 2015)

Stitches

Upcoming Figures

Series 2, Wave 1 and 2 (sometime in 2016)

Thrall

Jim Raynor

Sylvanas

Murky

Brightwing

Series 2 Deluxe (sometime in 2016)

Series Two Deluxe - Diablo Classic (2016)

The Future

Aside from the confirmed Series 2 characters, there is no further confirmation of future figures. Video game website Kotaku had reported that NECA planned to make all 36+ figures but I have not found a source on that. When I asked NECA on twitter how early sales were going the response was “well” so feel free to read into that how you will.

Where to Buy:

All of the regular-class figures are currently available for $21.99 USD on the official Blizzard gear store. Stitches is considered a deluxe-class figure and is selling for $49.99 USD.

Outside of the official store there are number of brick-and-mortar/online sellers. Supply of Wave 1 (Illidan, Nova) seems to be dwindling and may have finished production/shipping.

Don't Sleep on These

NECA figures are known to command high after-market prices once they finish their production run. If you're a true Blizzard fan I recommend getting these figures ASAP. Plus we need to show NECA and Blizzard the demand for these so they have incentive to finish the rest!

Seriously, look at these photos of my Arthas :)

Anyone else have these figures? Please share your thoughts in the comments below!