13 SHARES Share Tweet

HILLARY UNIVERSITY. BILL CLINTON SCORED $16.46 MILLION FROM FOR-PROFIT COLLEGE.

Woops. Hillary bashes Trump for Trump University as she and her husband are guilty of the same thing.

Breitbart broke the news that in 2015, Bill had to quickly (and quietly) resign from his post as honorary chancellor of Laureate Education, a for-profit college company, which has been involved in its own controversy in the past.

Bill’s abrupt departure was due to Laureates funneling of $16.46 million over five years, all the while Hillary’s State Dept. threw at least $55 million to a group run by Laureate’s founder and chairman, Douglas Becker, a man not surprisingly connected to the Clinton Global Initiative.

Smells fishy to me.

But wait, there’s more!

Who else is a major financial backer to Laureate Education? None other than billionaire George Soros. You know, the guy who also helped back Ted Cruz. The same guy that Glenn Beck had for years trashed, but when George was backing his man Cruz, Beck said nothing. But I digress.

The Washington Post reports, “Laureate has stirred controversy throughout Latin America, where it derives two-thirds of its revenue.” Over the course of Bill’s tenure, Laureate spent over $200 million a year on over the top marketing, such as internet banners, telemarketing, and billboard ads to lure poverty stricken students to enroll to the for-profit school.

Classy!

Remember folks. Those in glass houses should not throw stones. Yet Hillary and team seem to be throwing all the stones they can possibly get their hands on. Hillary University is nothing more than a scam. How can she possibly point fingers at Donald Trump?

It’s simple. She’s a politician. You know. A career liar. This is the same Hillary who has been surrounded by controversy her entire political career. Yet somehow, she’s the likely favorite in the Democratic race. It’s time to wake up. It’s time to elect someone who’s in it for us. The U.S.A. Someone who will, Make America Great Again.

Continue the conversation. Follow us on twitter : @trumpwallnow