https://www.siteground.com/go/blackfriday-cybermonday-2018



Home

Download

Forum

Wiki

IRC Chat

Isis

Language selection

EnglishItaliano

Main Menu

Home

What is Osiris

Citations

Download

Our sponsors / Donation

Contact us

Isis

Translations

Statistics

Help

Need support

Faqs

Documentation

Forum

Wiki

IRC Chat

How to contribute

Development

Changelogs

Roadmap

Guide

Who's Online

Softpedia

Home

serverless - anarchist - anonymous - unbreakable

"L'anarchia è una forma di società dove tendenzialmente si annullerebbe qualsiasi forma di autorità imposta; gli anarchici credono nella capacità naturale dell'uomo di autoregolarsi in società. L'esistenza di regole e convenzioni sociali nell'anarchia non è esclusa a priori a patto che le regole e le convenzioni vengano liberamente determinate e accettate dalla comunità interessata e non rappresentino un'imposizione derivante dal maggiore potere di alcuni rispetto agli altri."



Osiris is an engine that makes possible to build anarchic forums and portals where members directly choose rules and conventions by themselves.

Osiris portals are serverless, so they spread through the P2P network members. This allows the portals to be independent of central servers, free and indestructibles since they are supported by every portal member.

Moreover, all the sent contents are anonymous, enabling a strong privacy protection and ensuring that no one can overwhelm this experiment of free thought and knowledge distribution.

Osiris can also build monarchic portals for a traditional moderation.

Free Download

screenshots - documentation - forums



Osiris will become an open-source project

We announce that Osiris will become an open-source project, released under GPL.

Sources are not available yet, because we need to check them for understanding if a fork can be used to attack the system.

We are planning to release sources in few months.

We hope that this choice may help to raise the interest about our project, because we have many incompleted works without collaborators.

We are here in our forum for questions, also about technical details.



Osiris 0.13

The Osiris Team is happy to announce a new version of Osiris.

Osiris 0.13 gives many new improvements over every features: features, security, speed, stability.

Osiris is a freeware software made to build completely shared portals through p2p ( serverless ).

The software doesn't need any other pre-installed component to work, and it is distributed as installable software or portable, it's useful for external hardware.

You can download Osiris from the download-page

To register to a portal it's needed only to click on invite-link, or copy and paste the link into the browser. It's available a dedicated forum to spread invite links, here you will find and publish link to portals made by the community.

To surf portals where you have been registered, by running Osiris, click on the right arrow-button: you will see the main page showing all your subscriptions.

To made new portals is available a Video Tutorial that shows how to made a new one, manage contempt and publish it on the dedicated forum.

We kindly ask to report any problems on the official forum.

A special thanks is given ( as usual smile.gif ) to all the support team for the contribution to the release of this version, thanks!

Click here for the forum discussion



Osiris 0.12

The Osiris Team is happy to announce a new version of Osiris.

Osiris 0.12 gives many new improvements over every features: security, speed, stability and moreover this is the first Osiris version that introduce a native support of GNU/Linux.

Osiris is a freeware software made to build completely shared portals through p2p ( serverless ) and the new version 0.12 add the gateway Isis feature that gives the read-only access, to all content available on the Osiris p2p network with just a common web browser.

The software doesn't need any other pre-installed component to work, and it is distributed as installable software or portable, it's useful for external hardware.

You can download Osiris from the download-page ( eDonkey & Torrent links available )

To register to a portal it's needed only to click on invite-link, or copy and paste the link into the browser. It's available a dedicated forum to spread invite links, here you will find and publish link to portals made by the community.

To surf portals where you have been registered, by running Osiris, click on the right arrow-button: you will see the main page showing all your subscriptions.

To made new portals is available a Video Tutorial that shows how to made a new one, manage contempt and publish it on the dedicated forum.

We kindly ask to report any problems on the official forum.

A special thanks is given ( as usual smile.gif ) to all the support team for the contribution to the release of this version, thanks!

Click here for the forum discussion



Rilascio versione preliminare ai beta-testers della 0.12

E' stata rilasciata la versione 0.12 ai nostri beta-testers interni. Sia la versione Windows, che la versione nativa per Linux. Verrà rilasciata al pubblico quando sarà stabile.



Tools per le traduzioni

E' disponibile uno strumento online per aiutarci a tradurre i software Osiris / Isis / Anubis. Maggiori informazioni qui.



More...

Intervista a p2pforum.it

Osiris 0.11

Premio WWW Il Sole 24 Ore

Osiris 0.10 Beta

Osiris 0.9 Beta

Osiris 0.8 Beta

Osiris 0.7 Beta

Osiris 0.6 Beta

<< Start < Prev 1 2 Next > End >>

Results 1 - 13 of 19

Talk with us







Developments Meter

5%

Lastest available version:

0.13 (17/03/2010)

Development status for next version:

0.14 (5%)

Discuss in forum

Donations Meter

2%

Costs covered: 445€

Costs sustain: 19500€



Donate!

Promote!

Promote!

Community portals

DasPorn

Italian AnonymShare

Serverless News

United colors of Peer to Peer

The Animated River

L'isola dei torrenti

Enkeywebsite

La Ciurma del Mulo

PeerHarvest

eMule Italia

Latest discussions

partito operaio

Nuovo utente: domande

Luci a San Siro

parametri nell'istanza quick search

Rotta verso Osiris 1.0

... E ora affondate questo!

discrepanza nel mio osiris ta interfaccia e barra strumenti

proposte per chiarire il funzionamento di osiris ai nuovi utenti

utenti nei portali con lo stesso numero

Serverless Friends!

Important legal information - Other copyrights