For many anti-Trump comedians and show creators, making fun of President Trump is almost seen as passé. In fact, for South Park creator Trey Parker, he wants to stop using his show to focus on Trump to make fun of him because everyone seems to be doing it.

In an interview with the Los Angeles Times promoting his role in the new film Despicable Me 3, Parker (along with his co-creator Matt Stone) felt that their show became a linchpin to the chorus of anti-Trump comedy circuit.

“We fell into the same trap that ‘Saturday Night Live’ fell into, where it was like, Dude, we’re just becoming CNN now. We’re becoming: ‘Tune in to see what we’re going to say about Trump.’ Matt and I hated it but we got stuck in it somehow,” Parker said.

“This season I want to get back to Cartman dressing up like a robot and [screwing] with Butters, because to me that’s the bread and butter of “South Park”: kids being kids and being ridiculous and outrageous but not “did you see what Trump did last night?” Because I don’t give a … anymore.”

It’s not the first time that Parker has expressed this sentiment. When speaking to Bill Simmons of The Ringer, both Parker and Stone assumed Hillary Clinton would win, so they did a whole season story arc surrounding how girls have been slighted. And, of course, Trump’s historic upset completely changed all that.

“We were heading down this whole path [with] this big boy-girl war going on, and everyone thinks, ‘OK well hooray, Hillary’s gonna be president.’ And that means that Bill Clinton is the first gentleman.” Parker explained. “That to us was the most ironic, coolest thing to focus on. ‘OK, there you go, you win, he’s officially the first gentleman, how do you feel, girls?’ And that’s where the whole season was going and that’s what really got torn apart. [Mr.] Garrison [who portrayed Trump] was supposed to come back and just start teaching again and all this stuff and we were now just locked in to this other [timeline].”

For some who are looking to get away from politics, it’s nice to know that at least one comedy show is planning to provide an escape that focuses on making fun of everything again, rather than just the man sitting in the Oval Office.

Latest Videos