Well, one of the new wrinkles was some variations on the bubble screen concept which has been one of the staples of Chip Kelly's offense. He showed a couple of new wrinkles on this.

Fresh off a bye week, I am sure I was not the only one thinking Chip might use the extra week to break out some new wrinkles on offense. Despite that, what we saw yesterday was much of the same on offense with some interesting personnel changes as highlighted on the last post where we used Desean Jackson on a wheel route .

Check out this odd-looking trip-like formation. I am sure there is a name for it, and I am sure one of my commenters will let me know. On this formation, the receivers will run a bubble screen with Riley the intended reciever with 2 big TEs in Celek and Ertz leading the way:

Not surprisingly, this bubble screen has a read-option component to it. Here Foles is reading the DE:

McCoy gets a nice hole and runs for a nice gain. We actually ran this same play and formation 2 times in a row in the 1st quarter.

We went back to it in the 2nd quarter. Celek and Ertz blocking, but this time Desean Jackson instead of Cooper:

based on the numbers we get, there is no read and Foles quickly gets it to Desean. Might to Chip's delight, you can already see the sidewalk forming for Desean between the numbers and the hash:

Good blocking and an explosive play for Desean Jackson.

***

Here's another look, that Moose Johnston pointed out. We've seen Lane Johnson lined up really wide in our double stack formation. This time, we line him up in the slot. This is a creative playcall on 4th and 2. The Eagles spread 4 players to the top of the screen, helping to lighten the box:

Again, the read-option is built-in...and check out the 2 defenders in red focused on Foles:

The result is a light box, good blocking and a 4th down conversion for McCoy:

Here it is again on the bottom of the screen. Desean motioning down, Johnson in the slot.

The read-option and it appears Nick is reading Daryl Washington who drifts out of the box. Since he is defending the bubble, Lesean has a light box and Nick hands off:

One more time, we see it here with Cooper at the bottom of the screen. This time the DB very aggressively sprints to cut off the bubble option.

Without that option, the only other play Nick has is to keep and run. Unfortunately, Nick doesn't get much room to run (queue the Mike Vick chants and hwo Chip Kelly needs a mobile QB).