The CW’s ‘Supergirl’ was an emotional roller-coaster as well as full of action and character growth. Seeing some familiar faces return to the small screen was a refreshing surprise.

Concluding the Daxamite invasion storyline, Superman (Tyler Hoechlin) returned being a big help in the finale fight. His first appearance this season was in the first two episodes and left fans wanting to see him more. Because of the common threat to Earth, Lena Luthor (Katie McGrath) and Lillian Luthor (Brenda Strong) teamed up to try and create a weapon that would force the Daxamites off of Earth. At the same time, Supergirl (Melissa Benoist) challenged Rhea (Teri Hatcher) to Dakkam Ur, an ancient form of dual where the two would fight for Earth. J’onn J’onzz (David Harewood) also joined the fight along with the return of M’gann M’orzz (Sharon Leal) with White Martians to help.

Nothing good comes out of trusting Rhea to uphold the tradition. All she wanted was to take over Earth and turn it into New Daxam. Some of the best scenes going forward were ones that Mon-El (Chris Wood) and Superman (Hoechlin) shared as he accepted him as someone Kara was in love with. The heartwarming scenes were soon replaced by nothing but heroics and sadness. The weapon was deployed leaving all the Daxamites no choice but to leave or die. Mon-El was forced off the planet to survive, sharing a final and tearful scene with Kara as the two said their goodbyes. While the Earth is now safe, everyone around Kara is happy, except her as she is left with a broken heart.

What fans are left talking about is the final moments of the episode. Cat Grant (Calista Flockhart) now knows Kara’s secret, gives her some great advice, and hints at her return. The flashback scene of the destruction of Krypton and another pods leaves a lot of room for speculation. Nothing is yet confirmed other than it appears to be setting up for the villain coming in season three.

When it comes down to the season as a whole, it was a solid 22 episodes. The introduction of characters like Mon-El, Lena Luthor and M’gann M’orzz added a lot to the plot as well as progress character development of others. Lena Luthor was somewhat of an anti-hero throughout the whole season, never fully stepping into the good or evil side. What is left is to wonder whether she will follow in the steps of her brother Lex Luthor, a big enemy of Superman.

Perhaps the most significant character to be added was Mon-El, who came from a planet where tyranny and immoral rule was all it had. However over the course of the season, he was able to overcome who he used to be and grow into a hero. The romance with him and Kara was not something that overshadowed the plot in any way. Most of the time, the two shared scenes together that showed how much they cared for each other, but it didn’t take time away from the main focus of the episodes.

All in all, this episode was a great conclusion to the second season. The acting was really on point and portrayed the story and emotions very well. ‘Supergirl’ returns to The CW in October 2017.

Advertisements