Eight Delhi Police officers, including a joint commissioner and seven inspectors, will join the ACB.

The appointment of a joint commissioner-rank officer of the Delhi Police by Lt-Governor Najeeb Jung in the Anti-Corruption Branch (ACB) of the state government has taken a political turn with Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia sniffing a conspiracy in the posting.

Advertising

Sisodia alleged that the posting had been done as Jung had become nervous due to the reopening of the CNG fitness scam file. “Kya CNG ghotale ki file khulne se dar ke ghabrakar ki jaa rahi hai ACB ke new chief ki niyukti (Is the new ACB chief being appointed out of fear after the CNG fitness file has been reopened),” Sisodia tweeted.

[related-post]

Jung on Monday transferred Joint Commissioner M K Meena, who was in charge of the case of alleged suicide of Gajendra, the farmer who died at an AAP rally, to the ACB. After the Delhi government recruited officers from UP and Bihar in the ACB, which recently witnessed a fight between CM Arvind Kejriwal and Jung over the issue of jurisdiction, this is the first set of recruitment done by the Delhi Police in the anti-corruption unit.

Eight Delhi Police officers, including a joint commissioner and seven inspectors, will join the ACB. “The recruitment has been done to augment resources in fighting corruption,” Delhi Police spokesperson Rajan Bhagat said. Along with Meena, Inspectors Braj Mohan, Kumar Kant Mishra, Vivekanand Jha, Rajkumar, Rajendra Prasad, Ricchpal Singh Meena and Puran Chand have been transferred to the anti-graft body. Bhagat said more officers will be posted to the ACB as per requirement.

Meena was earlier posted with the security unit of Delhi Police and, after becoming the JCP of New Delhi range, he supervised the alleged maid torture case against former BSP MP Dhananjay Singh and his wife.

The Delhi BJP called Sisodia’s remarks a “compulsory habit to protest”. “Ever since they have come to power, protest is what they have been doing despite being in the government. The CM himself stated in public that they had sought officers from the Delhi Police and hoped that the L-G would direct the Delhi Police to send a few officers,” Satish Upadhyay, Delhi BJP chief, said.

Advertising

On Sisodia’s remark that the appointment of the officer who made Gajendra look like an accused reeked of a conspiracy, Upadhyay said, “There is no connection between that case and the appointment. They are sceptical of everything.”