This article is over 3 years old

Treasurer tells National Press Club sceptics are welcome to doubt the trade benefits but the government is convinced of them

The treasurer, Scott Morrison, has ruled out conducting “rear view” analysis of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement, saying that the government is satisfied with its projected benefits.

The only analysis done on the massive 12-country trade deal was conducted by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Consumer groups such as Choice had asked for independent review to be undertaken.

Trans-Pacific Partnership: four key issues to watch out for Read more

When asked by reporters during an address to the National Press Club, Morrison flatly refused.

“The work has been done ... in securing these agreements and the sceptics will always doubt the trade benefits of these sorts of deals,” he said. “They’re welcome to their scepticism. The government is convinced of it.

“Doing rear view analysis on these things after the work has been done – that can be contemplated – but we’re a bit more focused on getting on to the next set of issues that need to be addressed.

“We don’t intend to run the economy with a rear view mirror. We intend to look forward on what we have to do.”

The deal was struck in November and officially signed earlier this month. The 12 signatory countries are: Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore, the United States and Vietnam.

TPP trade deal will expand Australia's economy by less than 1%, World Bank reveals Read more

Morrison praised the trade minister, Andrew Robb, who announced his retirement last week and will hand the baton to Steve Ciobo at the swearing-in ceremony for the new ministry on Thursday.

“There is the outstanding record of the trade and investment agenda we have been pursuing over the last few years,” Morrison said.

“[Robb] has spearheaded that charge and delivered generations of prosperity for Australians from his great work and I want to thank Andrew on behalf of myself, and other colleagues here for the tremendous work he has done.”

Robb will take on the role of special trade envoy to ease Ciobo’s transition into the role, as Australia pursues free trade deals with Singapore and India.

Earlier this month, Robb rejected calls for a cost-benefit analysis of the 6,000-page deal, after it emerged that Australia’s economy would grow by just 0.7% as a result of signing the agreement.

The World Bank analysis showed that Australia fared worse than all other countries except for the US from the deal.