SAFETY FIRST: Ask an adult to help with tools you haven't used before.

With a tin can and paper clips, make a mini disc-golf basket. To play, toss bottle caps into the basket to score points!

WHAT YOU’LL NEED

28- to 32-ounce tin can

Can opener

Ruler

Fine-tipped marker

Tin snips

Work gloves

Drill

1⁄4″ and 1⁄16″ metal drill bits

1⁄4″ x 6″ carriage bolt

Three 1⁄4″ nuts

Adjustable wrench or pair of pliers

Utility knife

Screw-on plastic bottle cap

60 paper clips

About 12″ of small rubber tubing

Several metal bottle caps

WHAT YOU’LL DO

1. Put on your gloves and remove the lid of the can, cutting it from the side so there are no sharp edges. Empty and clean the can.

2. Measure 2″ from the bottom of the can. Draw a line around the can. Use the tin snips to cut off the bottom.

3. Drill a 1⁄4″ hole in the center of both the bottom and the lid. Drill another 1⁄4″ hole in the center of the plastic bottle cap.

Figure: 1/4″ holes drilled in the center of the bottle cap, lid and can bottom.

4. Drill 12 1⁄16″ holes around the outer edge of the lid.

Figure: 12 1/16″ holes evenly spaced and drilled into lid.

5. Push the carriage bolt up through the bottom.

Figure: Side view of inserted bolt.

6. Slide the plastic bottle cap down the carriage bolt. Screw the first nut down until it is snug against the top of the plastic bottle cap.

Figure: Side view of nut tightened on top of bottle cap.

7. Make a strand of paper clips by connecting five. Make 12 strands. Bend one paper clip into a circle that fits loosely around the carriage bolt. Attach all twelve strands to the circle.

Figure: 12 strands of five paper clips attached to the paper-clip circle.

8. Slide the circle down the carriage bolt until it rests on the plastic bottle cap.

9. Screw the second nut onto the carriage bolt until it is about 1⁄2″ down the bolt. Place the lid on the carriage bolt. Screw the third nut onto the bolt until it is flush with the top of the bolt. Screw the second nut against the bottom of the lid.

10. Connect the paper clips to the holes in the lid.

11. Cut the rubber tubing with the utility knife so you can fit it onto the top edge of the can bottom. Your bottle-cap toss game is complete!

HOW TO PLAY DISC-GOLF

Disc Golf (sometimes called Frolf or frisbee golf) is game in which individual players throw a flying disc at a goal. Like traditional golf, the object of Disc Golf is to complete a course in the fewest number of disc throws.

More about Disc Golf from the Professional Disc Golf Association