So we are inviting everyone to have a go with a competition! The best story submitted will win a prize of £100 to spend at our site!

With all the current zeitgeist for erotic fiction on the back of 50 shades of Grey, more and more people are starting to have a go at writing short stories themselves. An old girlfriend and I used to write half a story each and text it to each other to finish off, it certainly made getting home lots of fun. Whilst sitting poolside on our holiday, she picked up a book from the book exchange. She had been reading erotica all holiday and had run out so picked up one that somebody had left behind. I’m not sure of the author but in comparison to what she had just read this wasn’t hitting the same spot.

As I was happily reading my book she kept interrupting me with giggles reading out various passages to me. What was making us laugh so much was the language used. Some of the words just didn’t sound erotic or you just wouldn’t use in everyday talk and therefore sounded alien when read from the page.

There was one sentence that was describing a blow job that went something like this :- I gripped his **** in my hand stroking the shaft from tip to base in long deliberate motions, I stopped to sensuously lick the pre cum that glistened on his glans and my sex ached for him.

It was the use of the words ‘my sex’ and ‘glans’ that made it sound unrealistic and made us laugh but then I wondered if other words would put other people off? Words that don’t do it for me are his or her sex, Mons, glans, penis and vagina seem too medical others just silly.

Sylvia Day uses a liberal peppering of the words c*nt and c*ck which personally I like but I know the ‘c’ word is still taboo for many, I used to work with a girl for whom the words ‘moist gusset’ was as bad as swearing. Even panties is weird for some people and lingerie can sound too pretentious.

So what words do it for you? How do you want it laid out for you? Do you want Mills and Boon style euphemisms such as ‘ I felt his passion’ or ‘my heat’ do you want scientific words such as vagina, penis, glans etc or like me would you prefer more honest words such as pussy, clit, c*ck etc?

I guess as always whatever floats your boat is different for each person….

If you would like to enter you need to:-

First register on the main site here (So if you win we can add your credit)

Then use the contact form below to send over your story (email a copy to [email protected])

We will set a minimum of 500 words as a requirement and a maximum of 5000 (not including titles headers and spaces etc)

Don’t be shy and feel free to write in whatever style you like about whatever you like as long as it is not illegal. All entries will be posted on our blog (once we have read them!)

Some brief rules:-

Minimum 500 words Maximum 5000 (does not include titles, spaces etc

The story can be in any style and on any subject as long as it contains some erotic content

Nothing illegal will be considered and will be disqualified

You can write as an individual or as a team with a maximum of 3 writers per team (only one prize will be issued to a team)

The work remains your own but by submitting it you give us the right to post it on our site and affiliated sites

Entries will be posted under the competition tab and we encourage you to read and comment on each others. Please keep it supportive though. All comments will be vetted first and any comments deemed to be abusive or unfairly negative will not be posted

The closing date for entries is the 18 th of April 2014 and the winner will be announced by the 25 th of April 2014. The prize will be immediately available from that date

of April 2014 and the winner will be announced by the 25 of April 2014. The prize will be immediately available from that date Full T’s and C’s here

Let those creative juices flow!

Want to read the entries so far Click Here