Syria called on the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) to take action against Israel on Thursday after a reported Israeli air strike on a military facility near the Syrian-Lebanese border on Wednesday.

“The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic calls upon the UNSC to condemn the blatant Israeli aggressions [sic]," a statement carried on the state-run SANA news agency said, adding that Syria "calls on the international organization to adopt firm and immediate measures to stop those attacks and hold Israel accountable for its support to terrorism which would inflame the situation in the region and the world."

Israel's air force bombed a weapons depot in Homs province on Wednesday night local time, Lebanese media and a monitoring group said, the latest in a string of strikes in recent weeks.

Lebanese news outlet al-Mayadeen reported that Syria fired a surface-to-air missile at Israeli aircraft after the strike, which reportedly occurred in the suburbs of the city of Homs.

Local residents reported of Israeli jets circling in the area and an explosion, according to a report on the Lebanese site Anshara. Syrian television reported "an aggression" by Israel in the region, adding that the national army had "responded".

The Israeli army refused to comment on the report.

In Thursday's statement SANA described the facility as a "copper factory for civil industries in Hassyah industrial zone in Homs province."

The statement repeated claims frequently made by the regime of Bashar Al Assad that Israel secretly controls Islamist terror groups such as Islamic State (IS) and Al Nusra, who have been fighting the regime in an almost six-years-long civil war.

Israel has acknowledged carrying out airstrikes in Syria since the outbreak of the bloody conflict, in order to stop arms deliveries to Shiite militia Hezbollah, an ally of Assad's ruling clan.

The Syria observatory said Israel had also struck an arms depot near the Damascus airport on September 22, and this month targeted a jihadist faction linked to the Islamic State group in southern Syria, killing at least 10.

Damascus made a similar plea to the Security Council in mid-October, saying they were "surprised" by UNSC inaction.

Israel said last month it had attacked Syrian government artillery after fire from across the armistice line hit the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights

AFP contributed to this report.