Donald Trump Donald John TrumpHouse committee believes it has evidence Trump requested putting ally in charge of Cohen probe: report Vietnamese airline takes steps to open flights to US on sidelines of Trump-Kim summit Manafort's attorneys say he should get less than 10 years in prison MORE's campaign is encouraging its Republican Party surrogates to double down on the narrative that the presidential election is likely to be stolen by voter fraud.

While Trump now says he will accept “a clear election result,” his campaign is urging allies who defend Trump on television to sow doubts about vote counting in swing states.

ADVERTISEMENT

In campaign talking points sent out Wednesday and obtained by The Hill, the Trump team told Republican surrogates to cite examples of voter fraud in North Carolina, Colorado, Pennsylvania and Virginia.

Under a headline 'Must make points on rigged system,' the Trump campaign encourages surrogates to say, “We have also seen very significant recent voting irregularities across the country from Pennsylvania to Colorado and an increase in unlawful voting by illegal immigrants.”

Another Trump talking point reads: “Non-citizen votes may have been responsible for Barack Obama Barack Hussein ObamaWith low birth rate, America needs future migrants 4 ways Hillary looms over the 2020 race Obama goes viral after sporting black bomber jacket with '44' on sleeve at basketball game MORE’s narrow margin of victory in North Carolina in 2008.”

And another states: “CBS Denver affiliate found dead Coloradans were still voting. A dead World War II veteran voted in a 2006 primary election, and a woman who died in 2009 cast ballots in 2010, 2011, 2012 and 2013. Dead people were registered to vote in Virginia.”

The Trump campaign is also encouraging surrogates to invoke the threat of undocumented immigrants manipulating election results.

“More than 14 percent of non-citizens surveyed in 2008 and 2010,” one bullet point states, “said they were registered to vote.”

Multiple studies have found that cases of voter fraud are rare and unlikely to cause significant problems in national elections.

Several Republican lawmakers criticized Trump’s answer during the final debate Wednesday, when he told moderator Chris Wallace that he’d keep Americans in “suspense” about whether he’d accept the result on Election Day.

Trump has since clarified that he wants to reserve the right to contest close results; but he continues to sow broader mistrust among his supporters about the election process.

When pressed, several of Trump’s top allies, including his campaign manager, Kellyanne Conway, and vice presidential nominee Mike Pence Michael (Mike) Richard PencePence meeting with Senate GOP ahead of vote to block emergency declaration 'And the award for best political commentary by an Oscar nominee goes to...' UN nuclear watchdog: Iran maintains compliance with 2015 pact MORE, declined to endorse the theory that the election is likely to be stolen by fraud at the ballot box.

They’ve tried to shift the conversation to one exclusively concerning the “rigged” media. And, indeed, Trump’s campaign talking points also include the accusation that the “liberal media and the Clinton campaign have coordinated their personal attacks on Mr. Trump in order to rig the election on behalf of Hillary Clinton Hillary Diane Rodham ClintonSanders: 'I fully expect' fair treatment by DNC in 2020 after 'not quite even handed' 2016 primary Sanders: 'Damn right' I'll make the large corporations pay 'fair share of taxes' Former Sanders campaign spokesman: Clinton staff are 'biggest a--holes in American politics' MORE.”

A Republican source who received the Trump talking points was “puzzled” by the campaign’s decision to double down on the idea of rigged elections

“It’s unprecedented,” the source said. “Usually at this time of the year, we talk about getting our vote[ers] out and volunteers and getting lead on the target, not trying to convince people that this thing’s fixed.”

Asked about the talking points, Trump spokesman Jason Miller told The Hill: “These talking points articulate our position perfectly.

“Mr. Trump is committed to breaking up the rigged system in Washington and ensuring that the people — this grassroots movement fueling Mr. Trump's campaign — have a voice in how we govern going forward.”