"An appeaser is one who feeds a crocodile - hoping it will eat him last," goes the famous saying attributed to Winston Churchill. Of course, quoting Churchill will get you arrested in Great Britain these days. America isn't much better, thanks to the climate of intimidation created by, among others, the Southern Poverty Law Center.

The Values Voters Summit is a gathering of social conservatives in Washington DC that features leading Republican politicians, including Ted Cruz and Rand Paul. The latter is interesting because apparently Paul feels he can break from his left-libertarian following on issues like gay marriage, but not on immigration. Of course, leading social conservatives have also been aggressively pushing amnesty of late, perhaps attempting to purchase a separate peace with progressive enforcers.

It doesn't seem to have worked. Along with other fundraising scams, er, "civil rights groups," the $PLC is now attacking even the RNC of minicon Reince Priebus.

In an open letter published in The Washington Post and The Hill, the coalition is reminding RNC Chair Reince Priebus that 15 years ago his predecessor told GOP officials to shun the Council of Conservative Citizens because of the group’s racist views. This year’s campaign is asking the RNC to do it again. “Will the GOP condemn anti-LGBT bigotry as vigorously as it opposed racism 15 years ago?” the letter asks. [Coalition Calls on RNC to Distance Itself From Values Voter Summit, SPLC, September 24, 2014]

Of course, the obvious counter is that this is precisely why the PC Cringe never actually works—it simply emboldens the enforcers to move the goalposts and create something new. If the Values Voters summit is ditched, it will just be something else, ad infinitum.

There's also the deeply dishonest implication that every speaker at a summit or conference must agree with every statement every other person or group at the conference has written or said. Certainly, this never seems to apply to the Left.

“White folks was [sic] in caves while we was building empires…. We taught philosophy and astrology and mathematics before Socrates and them Greek homos ever got around to it.” — Rev. Al Sharpton [Should Al Sharpton be Fired From MSNBC For Making Racist Comments, by Mike Opelka, The Blaze, November 25, 2011]