LAS VEGAS -- Kelly Oubre Jr. was in demand Sunday, after his second summer league appearance for the Washington Wizards, and if it were up to him, the 19-year-old would happily oblige every microphone and camera thrust in front of him.

Oubre made headlines early in his pro career because of that confidence. It started on draft night, when Oubre, who had already turned heads with a shimmering maroon blazer and diamond-studded Christian Louboutin shoes, declared after being selected at No. 15 that whatever team got him was “getting a jewel.”

Later, once the Wizards finalized the trade that delivered Oubre’s draft rights in exchange for the No. 19 pick and two second-round picks, he was asked about his expectations for the night.

“My expectation was to go top 10,” Oubre said. "It doesn't work out like that for everybody, but I still feel like I'm one of the best players in this draft.”

In Vegas, he has started the process of trying to back up those words. Oubre scored 18 points on 5-of-17 shooting while grabbing eight rebounds over 32 minutes in Washington’s 94-74 loss to the D-League Select squad Sunday at Cox Pavilion on the UNLV campus.

Despite some efficiency struggles coming off a glitzier, 20-point, 10-rebound performance Friday in his pro debut against the Suns, Oubre’s confidence never wavered while he was prodded about his shooting woes.

He refused to make excuses, even when given the option to blame his 0-for-5 3-point performance on a deeper line at the NBA level.

“No, no, no,” Oubre said. He quickly pointed to his fundamentals and how he needs to remember not to rush. By the end of the answer, the confidence had muscled its way back in.

"I know I can shoot,” Oubre said. "I have 100 percent confidence in my shot.”

Most 19-year-olds are not this self-assured. That’s why a reporter wanted to know where Oubre's confidence comes from.

“Just knowing what I can do,” he said. "And hard work -- I work my butt off.”

Oubre is no stranger to adversity. Born in New Orleans, he was forced to relocate to Texas at age 9 in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina.

“My dad just decided he was going to keep me in Houston because they had better resources,” Oubre said on draft night. "By him doing that, that was another sacrifice. He left his job, and we went through a little struggle through a point of time where we were living in hotels and cars. If it weren't for that time -- long story short -- I wouldn't be here today because that put a chip on my shoulder, and it allowed me to realize that everything that I've ever loved and had could be gone in a split second.

"My family was moved around. I didn't see my mom for about two months. My little brother was a baby. He was just born a couple years before [the hurricane]. That time was pretty hectic in my life, and my parents had divorced, so by them being split up, we went separate paths. I thought I lost [my family]. I didn't hear from them for a week or so. I always think about that on the court. That's what gives me my drive to want to be the best that I can be.

"I've always felt like I've been slept on, and I'm ready to wake people up. I'm motivated, and I'm a worker, and I want to be the best that I can be at this next level."

Oubre drew attention Friday with his big numbers and gold Nikes. On Sunday, he was a bit more discreet, including with his basic, white sneakers.

He is undeniably athletic and makes things look easy on the floor. Despite an obvious need to bulk up, he is able to attack the basket and will finish in traffic more as he gets stronger.

"I have the light frame,” Oubre said. "Everybody knows that. Everybody can see that. But I’m not weak. I can bang. A lot of guys are trying me, but they’re going to be pretty surprised on how strong I am.”

There’s a belief that he can be an impact defender, given his 7-foot-2 wingspan, but Oubre is going to have to work to carve out a role on a Wizards team that won 46 games and was the fifth seed in the Eastern Conference the previous season.

The departure of Paul Pierce could open doors to more playing time. Oubre thinks he can earn that opportunity and pair well with Washington’s young backcourt.

"I definitely feel like I can learn from [John Wall and Bradley Beal], play with them, and we can be successful together,” Oubre said. "By me doing so, coming in, I feel like I bring a lot to the team, I bring a lot to the table, and I'm just ready to get to work and help this team win.”

As usual, he has never sounded more confident.