Turing Pharmaceuticals CEO Martin Shkreli (CBS/screen grab)

Turing Pharmaceuticals CEO Martin Shkreli accused Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-VT) of taking “cheap shots” against him while also challenging the Democratic presidential candidate to a debate, Attn reported.

Shkreli, who became known as “Pharma Bro” after being widely criticized for raising the price of the medication Daraprim from $13.50 a pill to $750 a pill last month, lashed out at Sanders through his Twitter account.

“It’s amazing to me that you, desiring to be the leader of our country, are so misinformed,” Shkreli wrote. “Let’s have a public debate on this.”

He also accused the senator of not understanding the healthcare industry, saying, “I hope he debates this topic with me instead of relying on soundbites and cheap shots.”

Shkreli’s tweets can be seen below.

@SenSanders It's amazing to me that you, desiring to be the leader of our country, are so misinformed. Let's have a public debate on this.

— Martin Shkreli (@MartinShkreli) October 9, 2015

Senator @BernieSanders doesn't understand healthcare. I hope he debates this topic with me instead of relying on soundbites and cheap shots. — Martin Shkreli (@MartinShkreli) October 9, 2015

The former hedge fund manager’s attack came after Sanders and Rep. Elijah Cummings (D-MD) contacted him on Sept. 21 asking for financial information about Turing Pharmaceuticals.





The two lawmakers later said in a statement that, after promising to lower the price of the drug in response to the public backlash, Shkreli “hired an army of new Washington lobbyists and lawyers to stem the massive fallout from his actions and to stymie congressional oversight.”

Shkreli fired back saying Sanders “should be ashamed” for attacking the industry, and later rejecting allegations that he raised the price of Daraprim out of greed.

“I don’t even own a car,” he wrote. “I don’t even have a driver’s license. Our company is not profitable. My salary is $0. I give millions to charity.”

Those tweets can be seen below.

Attacking the pharmaceutical industry that creates jobs and leads the world in advances in medical research–@SenSanders should be ashamed. — Martin Shkreli (@MartinShkreli) October 9, 2015