This 1994 Range Rover County LWB is a well-maintained example with 55k kilometers (~34k miles) that is powered by a 4.2 liter Rover V8. The truck was sold new at Lone Star Mercedes-Benz Range Rover in Calgary, Alberta, and has been registered in Vancouver, British Columbia since 1995. The seller is the third owner and purchased the truck four months ago. He replaced the headliner, tires, and a few minor worn items, and enjoyed a 750 mile road trip through British Columbia over Labor Day weekend with no issues. Cosmetics are in good order with the paint and interior looking well-preserved, and the truck features numerous factory options like brush guards and running boards. The Rover has no modifications from stock, and the A/C system and air suspension are fully functional. The seller describes the truck as running well, but has decided to sell since he rarely drives it and is limited on space. The sale includes service records from previous owners, receipts from work done by the seller, clean Carfax and Carproof reports, and a clean British Columbia title.

The Cornish Cream paint appears glossy with no noticeable scratches or blemishes, and the truck received a nearly $1k detailing on November 3rd. There is no history of any accidents on the Carfax, though the seller reports that a small dent was recently removed. Records also show a $478 vandalism claim in November, 1996 and a $454 comprehensive claim in June, 1997. The aluminum body panels are straight, and the steel bonnet and tailgate show no signs of corrosion.

This truck was equipped with several factory options including:

Wraparound brush bar with lamp guards ($1,116)

Rear lamp guards ($456)

Fog lamp covers ($114)

Running boards ($1,058)

Loadspace protector ($384)

Rubber floormat set ($279)

Trailer hitch kit ($254)

The County LWB variant increased the wheelbase of the Range Rover to 108 inches long, which offered more legroom for rear passengers and a larger cargo area. The seller notes that the air suspension works as it should, and the front shocks were replaced at 24k miles by the previous owner. The stock 16″ wheels are in good condition and wear new Yokohama Geolandar tires that were installed on August, 25th (including spare). Exterior rubber is in good condition with no major UV damage, and all of the lights are working correctly.

The interior looks sharp with Light Stone Connolly leather upholstery and burled walnut trim. This was the last year of the classic dash for the Range Rover, with the 1995 model using a dash lifted from the Discovery.

The leather on the seats shows little wear with no cracks, creases, tears, or damage to the piping. The seller added a new headliner after purchase, and the carpets and floormats appear clean with no wrinkles.

Interior plastics have held up well, and there are no cracks on the dash. All of the gauges, lights, power accessories, sunroof, A/C system, and cruise control are said to function properly. The clock is currently not working and the seller notes that the original radio occasionally cuts out.

The 4.2 liter Rover V8 sits in a tidy engine compartment and features Lucas 14CUX electronic fuel injection. The permanent four-wheel drive truck utilizes a 4-speed ZF automatic transmission coupled to an LT230 transfer box. The engine looks clean with organized wiring, and was advertised at producing 202 horsepower and 251 lb.ft. of torque when new.

The thermostat was replaced by the previous owner less than 10k miles ago, and the seller recently replaced the radiator hose, water pump pulleys, trackrod end links, and the daytime running lights relay. The motor runs strong and provides even power through all gears, and the truck is said to offer a smooth ride with no abnormal sounds.

All of the original owner’s manuals are included, as well as a working fob, three keys, and the original off-roading instructions VHS tape. The original service booklet includes dealer stamped scheduled maintenance, service records from the previous owner, and receipts from the seller for the tires, headliner, and detail also come with the truck.