About

Hello Kickstarter,

We’re GoPole. The original third-party GoPro accessory brand. Since 2010 we’ve been making innovative accessories for the world's top athletes and filmmakers. As we kick off our sixth year we are excited to bring you our first kickstarter campaign ever — A versatile mount that offers protection, stability and accessory mounting options for your GoPro® camera. We call it Triad Grip.

Triad Grip is a do it all mount that is perfect for underwater use or professional video production. Featuring two rubber grips and a rubber glide handle, Triad Grip can be used for two-handed or single-handed filming. Two ¼"-20 threaded inserts and three integrated shoe mounts are provided for connecting mics, lights and other camera accessories.

Multiple Mounting + Configuration Options

Attaching multiple cameras allows you to capture photos and videos simultaneously or use different frame rates and settings on each camera.

Camera 1: 4k30 - Camera 2: 1080p120

Camera 1: 2.7k60 - Camera 2: Continuous Photo (5 SPS)

The three main components to Triad Grip are:

1. The Camera Slide System

Allows you to attach one or many cameras to Triad Grip. Attach anywhere within the slide in any orientation or location.

2. Three Rubber Matrix Grips

Perfectly integrated into the frame of Triad Grip are three rubber matrix grips. The two grips on the side are made to be used when filming with two hands. This gives the filmer a solid grip and helps stabilize footage when shooting follow cams. The third grip is a rubber glide handle to be used when filming low angles with one hand. Hanging the camera below the center of gravity produces ultra smooth footage.

3. Accessory Attachment Points

Consisting of 3 shoe mounts and 2 ¼"-20 threaded inserts for connecting a variety of attachments.

Together, these three components allow for many different setups:

A pro setup with a mic and light attachments mounted to a tripod. (see Pro Backer package)

A production setup with an LCD monitor to review and record footage externally

An underwater setup with adjustable arms and dive lights

+ Many more setups

Compatible cameras:

All GoPro Cameras: HERO4 Session, HERO4, HERO+LCD, HERO, HERO3+, HERO3, HERO2, HD HERO + Any Camera With a Standard Tripod (1/4"-20) Connection

Details:

Dimensions: 10.5" x 6.0" x 1.0"

Weight: 11oz

Materials: Plastic, Rubber, Stainless Steel Hardware

The top grip is a rubber glide handle to be used when filming low angles with one hand. Hanging the camera below the center of gravity produces ultra smooth footage.

The two grips on the side are made to be used when filming with two hands. This gives the filmer a solid grip and helps stabilize footage when shooting follow cams.

From professional video production to capturing footage beneath the surface, Triad Grip is a versatile mount that can be used in many different applications.

When developing Triad grip, we wanted to get the details just right and think outside the box on how useful and versatile this product could be. We chose to manufacture the body out of polycarbonate, which is strong, rigid and lighter than aluminum.

We started off with sketched concept generation and fleshed out the main components and rough dimensions of the product. Our industrial designers then fine tuned, dimensioned and stylized everything in CAD. Once we were happy with everything, we produced a 3d printed prototype.

3D Printed Prototype (left); Production Prototype (right)

We need your support

We are now at the point where everything has been engineered and working prototypes have been produced. We are ready to move forward with manufacturing and just need your support to bring Triad Grip to market.

Thank you backers!

In The Box: 1x Triad Grip, 2x GoPro® Mounts, 2x Hi-Torque Thumbscrews, 1x Wrist-Strap Attachment

Retail Packaging