Sarah Palin and her family were reportedly involved in a mass brawl at a snowmobile party which had to be broken up by police.

Alaska's gossip blogs lit up with accounts of the Saturday night fight, claiming that the former governor's son and daughter both threw punches while Mrs Palin herself shouted: "Don't you know who I am?" as the scene descended into chaos.

Police confirmed that "some of the Palin family members" were at the party, where a "physical altercation [was] taking place between multiple subjects". A spokesman added: "Alcohol was believed to have been a factor in the incident."

According to Amanda Coyne , an Alaskan political blogger, the incident took place at a party celebrating the Iron Dog snowmobile race, a contest won several times by Mrs Palin's husband Todd.

Mrs Palin's 25-year-old son Track apparently emerged from a Stretch Hummer limousine and got caught up in a fight, soon joined by his younger sister, Bristol. The blogger suggested that the other participant in the fight was a man who had previously dated another sister, Willow Palin.

Track Palin stumbles out of a stretch Hummer, and immediately spots an ex-boyfriend of Willow’s. Track isn’t happy with this guy, the story goes. There’s words, and more. The owner of the house gets involved, and he probably wished he hadn’t. At this point, he’s up against nearly the whole Palin tribe: Palin women screaming. Palin men thumping their chests. Word is that Bristol has a particularly strong right hook, which she employed repeatedly, and it’s something to hear when Sarah screams, “Don’t you know who I am!” And it was particularly wonderful when someone in the crowd screamed back, “This isn’t some damned Hillbilly reality show!”

Sarah Palin [centre] surrounded by her family members. Back row: son Track and husband Todd, second row: daughter Willow [left] and Bristol [right] and daughter Piper [front]

Anchorage Police would not confirm whether the former governor was at the scene, saying that "no arrests were made" and the incident was being looked by detectives and prosecutors.

It wasn't the only drama to befall the Palins in recent days. On Sunday, the day after the fight, a man was arrested for allegedly stalking Bristol Palin.

Miss Palin, now 23, first came to international attention during the 2008 election when it emerged she was pregnant at 17. She was twice engaged to the baby's father, Levi Johnston, but the pair split up without marrying.

Mr Johnston later wrote a book titled "Deer in Headlights: My Life in Sarah Palin's Crosshairs".

Police said that Miss Palin returned to her home on Sunday to find Peter PW Ferrero, a 25-year-old man from Florida waiting in her driveway. He had allegedly bombarded her with hundreds of Facebook message has been charged with felony.

Ferrero claimed he had climbed up to a third-floor balcony at the house and tried to open a door there, according to a police report.

Sarah Palin’s office did not respond to requests for comment.