It's only been a few days since the latest Pokemon Go update caused more and more players to return capturing Pokemon and battling gyms, and now, the Niantic CEO just teased that the hit AR mobile game is hiding a secret. Would he finally reveal that Gen 2 Pokemon release is just a few steps away? Or would he give us more clues as to what Niantic Labs is cooking up for their next update?

Niantic Labs CEO confirms Pokemon Go has a secret

John Hanke, Niantic Labs CEO, recently confirmed to GamesRadar that Pokemon Go has secrets planted in the game app. "There will always be secrets in the game that no one has found because we're always adding new secrets to the game. There's one out there right now and we'll see how that plays out over the course of the next few weeks," Hanke told Louise Blain of Gamesradar.

When Blain asked if the Pokemon Go secret was released with the Halloween event update, Hanke answered, "I am not giving you any clues." Right, and we're almost there! Yet, his answer is getting more vague than ever, leaving everyone to keep wondering. Smart move, sir!

Pokemon Go Leak

With the latest Pokemon Go update 0.45.0 for Android and 1.15.0 for iOS that came with huge bonuses due to the Free Bonus Event (until Nov.11) and Daily Quests feature, reports have also shown that the update code revealed a hundred new Pokemon that are set to arrive pretty soon. Speculations arose that these are probably the highly-awaited Gen 2 Pokemon. Generation 2 Pokemon that were found in the datamined info include Chikorita, Bayleef, Pichu, Noctowl, Cleffa, Iglybuff, Bellossom, and Politoed, among others.

The recent Pokemon Go leak also unveiled a new Transform move and an animation sequence which may mean that Niantic is also about to release Ditto, a Pokemon known to have the ability to transform. More exciting updates for us then!

What do you think about the Pokemon Go secret the Niantic CEO hinted? Could there be more interesting updates aside from the introduction of Gen 2 Pokemon? Share your thoughts on the comment section below!