After hours of labor and one stressed out mama, Faith Hale was born and thankfully she was most definitely Jebediah’s child! She was born a Friendly Couch Potato. Lizzie was so excited that it wasn’t Omari’s child. She could now have the perfect life she has been wanting.

George and Kayla loved being grandparents. Kayla was in playing with Faith all the time and George was learning the guitar so he could sing to her at night. Living with Faith now made them wish they would have had more kids when they were younger. But for now grand kids would do and they both wished for at least 5!

Lizzie and Jebediah had no problems adjusting to life as parents. They loved taking on the all the responsibilities. Jebediah threw himself into his work in order to bring in more money while Lizzie was on maternity leave. He spent a majority of his time at the computer but he made sure to break away from time to time to cuddle his little girl.

After a couple weeks Lizzie made her way back to the alchemy table but she was a little rusty. She didn’t think it would have an effect on her, but it did. She accidentally mixed two potions that exploded and turned her into a toad. She freaked out and ran home. She didn’t want anyone to see her like this but she didn’t know how to fix it.

That night, Jenri came over to announce her second pregnancy! Kayla was so excited and spent most of the time feeling and talking to her tummy. Then out of no where she started to feel dizzy. She stood up and realized what was happening. Her time had come. She looked back on her life, her three daughters, her 3 (and a half) grandchildren, her house, her job, the love of her life, and smiled. She did everything she wanted to, seen everyone and everything she wanted to. Kayla lived her life to the fullest. So when Grim came to greet her she just shook his hand and went willingly.

Lizzie was devastated. After Faith was born she thought she was going to have a perfect life. But now her mom had died and she was still a toad with no idea how to fix it. She spent most of her time eating flies or at the alchemy station trying to figure out what to do. She wasn’t able to care for Faith because she screamed every time she looked at her mom. Lizzie was desperate to fix this.

After days of research she finally found the solution. All she needed was true love’s kiss (sounds a little corny and fairy tale like to me..) So she ran to Jebediah.

L: “Please *ribbit* all you need to do is kiss me *ribbit* and I will be back to normal!”

At first Jebediah was appalled at the idea. But he wanted his beautiful wife back. So he closed his eyes, puckered up, turned her head, and planted a kiss on the side of her slimy scaly face. She started to smoke a green colored smog and then *poof* she was back to normal. The first thing she did (after kissing Jebediah realizing he was her true love) was go and cuddle Faith.

Speaking of Faith, it is time for her birthday! Lizzie is sad that she missed most of her child’s infancy due to the toad curse, but she couldn’t wait to see how beautiful her little girl would grow up to be!

Advertisements