Oklahoma City Thunder guard Russell Westbrook (0) shoots in front of Indiana Pacers forward Solomon Hill (44) during the first quarter of an NBA basketball game in Oklahoma City, Tuesday, Feb. 24, 2015. (AP Photo/Sue Ogrocki) (Photo: Sue Ogrocki, AP)

OKLAHOMA CITY – Even when expecting an offensive flurry and the torrent of noise cascading down from the cheap seats inside Chesapeake Energy Arena, the anticipation isn't enough to actually endure the blows.

In the quiet time before Tuesday night's game, the Indiana Pacers had prepared for everything that makes the Oklahoma City Thunder one of the most feared home teams in the NBA.

But then, Russell Westbrook shrieked and scored. The Thunder splashed 3s. The sold-out arena went unhinged and the Pacers, for the first time in more than a month, digested a blowout defeat, 105-92.

BOX SCORE: Thunder 105, Pacers 92

Indiana never held the lead and by the fourth quarter had fallen into a 23-point deficit even before coach Frank Vogel emptied the bench of his DNP crew to finish the game.

"I don't remember the last time," C.J. Miles said, referring to the team being on the wrong end of a big loss. Miles would have had to think all the way back to the Jan. 21 game in Atlanta to recall that bad memory.

Through February, the Pacers had won seven of eight games and pulled within half a game of the last spot of the playoffs. However, the trip to Oklahoma City stalled this run as the Pacers (23-34) couldn't withstand a devastating 24-5 run that stretched from the third quarter to the opening minutes of the fourth.

This wave all started after Miles knocked down a 3-pointer that pulled the Pacers to within 65-64 with 4:32 remaining in the third quarter. Then, Westbrook responded by either scoring or facilitating the Thunder through the rough patch and solidifying his triple-double (20 points, 11 rebounds, 10 assists) with more than 2 minutes still left in the third.

"We did mention some of the guys could get red hot," Ian Mahinmi said. "We did mention the Russell Westbrook pick-and-roll game, and some of the stuff we could control, we didn't go a great job."

The depth of the Thunder, now 9-1 through February, has carried the team through a season of injuries. Both teams have felt their share of pain, but while Indiana's have subsided – every injured player but Paul George has returned to the lineup – Oklahoma City remains in recovery mode. Kevin Durant, the reigning MVP, missed his third straight game and recently needed surgery to reduce pain in his surgically repaired right foot. Then, before Durant even arrived in the arena on Tuesday night, wearing a walking boot, the team announced that newly acquired Steve Novak had undergone an appendectomy. Thunder players have now missed 152 total games this year.

"A lot of punches thrown at us this year," Oklahoma City coach Scott Brooks said. "But we're still standing."

The Thunder stand because Westbrook's sheer energy and will command them to. In the first quarter, after he attacked the rim, Westbrook had already entered gonzo mode, flexing and yelling at the crowd as he strutted back to his sideline.

"He's the motor of that team and just what he means to that team speaks for itself," said George Hill, who had to spend time tracking Westbrook. "I think he's one of the top players in this league, for sure."

By the fourth quarter, Westbrook turned into the craziest cheerleader in the house. Since no Thunder starter played a single minute in the final frame – their work for the night was over after opening an 80-69 lead at the end of the third – Westbrook could celebrate the round of 3-pointers the Thunder bench drilled in three consecutive possessions. From that knockout punch, the Thunder led by 20 points and the Pacers would soon turn their attention to Friday night.

"We have to play better to beat a really good team in their building," Vogel said. "Even without KD, they're a really good team. We didn't play well enough and we have to regroup and go after Cleveland."

Call Star reporter Candace Buckner at (317) 444-6121. Follow her on Twitter: @CandaceDBuckner.