A gift in three parts, my Scottish 'Santa is quite the sleuth! The two biggest themes were video games and delicious food. She even made sure my adorkable mutt Pochi got in on the action!

The first to arrive was a really cool poster with colored silhouettes of Nintendo's best-known characters. That will be getting framed and hung in the basement that I've recently converted into a retro gaming den. In fact, it would be there now if I'd had two seconds to sit down and gather myself since December began. =p

The next day, a box arrived that was clearly for Pochi. In fact, he must have been able to smell it, because he started losing his mind as soon as I brought it inside. Upon opening, he found a squeaky toy (that is mercifully ultrasonic, so I can't hear it), two bags of natural treats, a large crunchy bone (which he absolutely demolished in minutes), and a rawhide twist!

About this time, I logged into Reddit to discover that she'd given me three months of Reddit Gold! Whee! =)

The grand finale finally made it to me on Christmas Eve! It was a large, hand-packed box of assorted goodness, with an envelope labelled "Open First". Not one to ignore directions, I opened it to discover her delightfully creative rendition of "The Twelve Days of Christmas" with Zelda-themed substitutions! (Side note: Seriously... How often does a guy get serenaded with The Legend of Zelda? A girl after my own heart!) The card also mentions the hope that I have a sweet tooth. Eeeeyes ma'am. I certainly do.

Anywho, this box contained dozens of little packages, and each of these things was individually wrapped. This must have taken her hours! I started taking pictures of everything as I unwrapped it, before I realized that would be a ridiculous quantity of pictures. Among the deluge of candy and confections (like, legit: I'm about to celebrate the first coming of Christ, and I already have enough sweets to last until the second) were three pairs of cute/funny printed socks (zombie, sneaker, and sandal), a bamboo puzzle game that looks like it will wreck my brain in short order, and a cool fish-shaped toy that curls up in your hand when exposed to your body heat. Finally, just when I thought it couldn't get any better, at the bottom was an incredible hand-drawn portrait of Link from Windwaker! I know that on the card she said she couldn't draw, but she's clearly just being modest. If I had attempted such a sketch, it would be a stick figure done with green crayon. =p

Thank you, Littleone23! You made my first exchange amazing! =)