With the Seattle Seahawks season over, Seattle can turn their attention towards the 2017 season. The Seahawks offensive line was abysmal, and every Seattle fan and their mother are praying that the unit improves next season. The Seahawks line did not look as bad in the playoffs, albeit a small sample size, as it did in the regular season, however. The group created some huge holes for Thomas Rawls at times. The pass protection, however, has never surpassed underwhelming. It is time to find a core player for the Seahawks to build off of up front through the draft, and here are some of their top options.

1. OT Cam Robinson, Alabama

Scroll to continue with content Ad

Regarded by most as the top offensive line prospect in the country, Robinson would be a dream selection if Seattle could get their hands on him. Astonishingly quick for his build, Robinson owns all the talents of a potential day one starter in the National Football League. Standing six-foot-six, 310 pounds, the three-year Alabama starter controls the point of attack and shows outstanding technique in pass-protection, two of the major factors the Seahawks offensive line is missing. Multiple mock drafts have him actually falling back to Seattle at the 26thpick, but as we get closer to the draft his stock seems to still be on the rise.

2. OG Dan Feeney, Indiana

Story continues

A four-year starter at Indiana, Feeney’s experience is certainly no concern. Measuring six-foot-four, 305 pounds, the guard brings excellent quickness for his build and a physicality coaches at the N.F.L. level want to see. Effective against pass rush, but he will have to adjust to N.F.L. quarterbacks hanging onto the ball longer. Feeney is certainly a viable replacement for Mark Glowinski. If Feeney was selected Germain Ifedi would probably see reps at left guard, allowing Feeney to fill in the right guard position. Unfortunately, he does have an injury background that includes a history of concussions, so a thorough medical examination is likely necessary.

3. OG/OT Forrest Lamp, Western Kentucky

Lamp could be the potential perfect fit for what Seattle wants to do up front. Often regarded as one of the top guard prospects in the draft, Lamp has spent his last two college seasons at tackle. With Tom Cable’s history of plug-and-play offensive lineman, he may be exactly what Cable is looking for. At six-foot-four, 300 pounds, Lamp is built like a wall and brings one of the best pass protection techniques in the country. A combination of aggressiveness and ability to stay lower than the defender has been the focal point of the young blockers excellence. Certainly a mid-first-rounder or later, Lamp could end up in the Emerald City.

4. OT Ryan Ramczyk, Wisconsin

Ramczyk is thought of by some draft experts as their top lineman in the 2017 Draft, but experience remains his biggest negative. From a Division III player at UW-Stevens Point, to All-American offensive tackle at Wisconsin, Ramczyk has a long way to go still to be N.F.L. ready. Ramczyk redshirted in 2015 after transferring, and 2016 was his only Division I experience. However, this seems to be his only weakness. Showing exceptional balance, agility and power at the point of attack, it looks like he has been playing a high level much longer than a single season. Great technique in pass protection shows his knack for the art of blocking is surely there, and it will likely require the N.F.L. preseason to truly gauge how effective Ramczyk will be early on in his career. It is worth noting, though, he underwent hip surgery just three days after Wisconsin’s 24-16 victory over Western Michigan in the Cotton Bowl. It remains to be seen how this will affect him in the long-run

5. OG Dorian Johnson, Pittsburgh

Another prospect that could move around the line if needed, Johnson played left tackle, right guard and left guard while at Pitt. To put it simply, this guy is a near must-have if your Seattle’s coaching staff. Standing six-foot-five inches and weighing 315 pounds, he is one of the most N.F.L.-ready offensive lineman to enter the draft in a long while. Little-to-none of that weight is excess, as Johnson is relatively lean and downright ripped. Throw exceptional technique and patience and Johnson may be the perfect blocker. He has shown great ability as a pulling guard, which is another huge need for the Seahawks up front. Johnson has potential as a day one starter and Seattle has a golden opportunity to select him later than they probably should be able to.

AROUND COVER32

Confidence Rankings: Which of the final four teams do we trust the most?

Draft:: Five players to watch from the East/West Shrine Game

Playoff Pickems:: Who will be playing on Super Bowl Sunday?

6. OT/OG Zach Banner, USC

Any player that can move about the offensive line is immediately much more attractive to a Seattle franchise looking for any help they can get. Banner is a six-foot-eight, 360-pound giant of a human. Obviously, with all that weight, he must clog up holes instead of make them right? Wrong. Banner shows elite movement for his size and a coachable technique. Another great point-of-attack blocker, his biggest negative is he has been known to make mental mistakes and can often lose his balance in pass protection. This, of course, has hindered his productivity at times. However, as stated before, his ability to possibly move inside makes him an intriguing option, especially to Seattle’s needs.

7. OT Dion Dawkins, Temple

A player who will have a lot of work to do prior to his first season in the N.F.L., Dawkins could be very good with the correct coaching. This comes as result of him being able to slack off on technique due to his refrigerator-like frame. At six-foot-five, 320 pounds, he is among the heaviest blockers in this year’s draft. He consistently won at the point of attack and exceptional power is among his greatest strengths. Not quite a day one starter, he is lower on this list than he is on most peoples, as Seattle is in desperate need of a foundation. However, Dawkins might have one of the biggest upsides among lineman in the draft.

8. OT Garrett Bolles, Utah

Arm length may be the deciding factor in keeping Bolles from being drafted but he has enough other positives to allow him to be intriguing. Coming from a rough-around-the-edges background, the 24-year old still has plenty of potential at the professional level. Another power player, Bolles maintains balance and agility that keeps him effective on the outside as a tackle. Often lackadaisical on the basics, though, some coaching will be needed to fix some bad habits. Not necessarily a day one starter, but Bolles has a definite shot at developing into a legit top player.

9. OG Nico Siragusa, San Diego State

Earning two all-Mountain West first team selections and a third-team AP All-American selection at SDSU, Siragusa certainly could play either guard position at the pro-level. This would be a perk especially for Seattle as they would probably enjoy leaving Germain Ifedi where he is and just replace Glowinski. At six-foot-five and 300 pounds, he is another typical mammoth-like blocker who has elite power. Luckily, power prospects are exactly what the Seahawks need, and this draft is filled with them. Great at blocking for the run, Siragusa was among the SDSU front that opened holes for one of the NCAA’s most prolific rushers, Donnel Pumphrey.

10. OT Adam Bisnowaty, Pittsburgh

A conventional offensive tackle, Bisnowaty possesses all the necessary attributes to be successful in the N.F.L. Being much more agile and quick than he looks, he also owns very long arms and a great body structure. Able to contain pass rushers and defeat run-stuffing defenders, Bisnowaty has almost everything you want in a rookie, with some remaining coachables. His balance is one obvious issue, but that can be improved and made a non-issue with the correct training. He does have an injury background, so his medical evaluation as we near the draft must be watched very closely.

The post Top 10 Offensive Lineman Seattle Seahawks Could Draft appeared first on Cover32.