Signup to receive a daily roundup of the top LGBT+ news stories from around the world

Godfrey Bloom, who was suspended from UKIP for homophobic and sexist comments, has spoken of his high regard for Douglas Carswell.

It was revealed today that a senior UKIP source has called for a leadership election following Nigel Farage’s return as party leader after just three days. The source described Mr Farage’s leadership as: “A tragedy of self-destruction”.

Former UKIP MEP Godfrey Bloom appeared on the Victoria Derbyshire show on BBC2 to discuss the future of UKIPs leadership.

Mr Bloom was suspended from the party in 2013 after describing a lesbian as “a queer” and women party members “sluts”. He left the party at the end of last year, claiming it was “too politically correct”.

Asked his thoughts on Mr Farage’s style of leadership, Mr Bloom said: “He is rather capable of some abrasive behaviour. He’s not a team player.

“He is very popular with the membership, but sooner or later UKIP is going to have to decide whether they want someone who’s popular in the UKIP conference hall, or popular with the electorate.”

He went on to suggest UKIP’s only MP Douglas Carswell for the position of leader.

“I would suggest that the leadership should come from the person who has been elected in Westminster. The fight is from Westminster now, which means Douglas Carswell.

“I think regardless of the politics or your feelings for Douglas Carswell he’s clearly one of the most highly principled men in politics. He’s a sort of Dennis Skinner of the right.

“He’s a man of extraordinary presence and I think naturally should step forward now.

“But I don’t think he wants it. It’s a poison chalice.”

Mr Carswell voted against same-sex marriage during his time as a Conservative MP, calling it “arrogant”.

He has stopped short of saying he completely agrees with Mr Farage’s statements on “foreigners with HIV“. His father, Wilson Carswell was one of the first doctors to recognise HIV in Uganda and a pioneer of HIV research.