Description: Hitler doesn't like the new meta after the Heroes of Skyrim drop

Heroes of Skyrim has been released

and we are hoping to build some decks.

We particularly thought you would be

interested in a couple of cards specifically:

Echo of Akatosh and Praetorian Commander

Just another failed attempt to make token decks relevant, I assume

Not exactly...

Not tokens...

Tokens aren't effected at all

Summoning them gives your whole deck keywords or stat bonuses

If you quit Hearthstone because of RNG, leave the room now.

Of all the insanity!

That much raw value for 6 mana is insane!

Do they think people enjoy facing 2-mana 7/5s?

We might as well all just dust our Odahviings now-

he'll do nothing at all to a board full of giant monsters!

I'll have to use hard removal on two drops

because they'll be too huge to ignore!

But sir, playing a 3/3 on turn 6 is a huge tempo loss!

Their next turn could be a 6/4 drain!

Just win before turn 6 and you'll be fine...

I'm not interested in a game that locks me into aggro!

We had a diverse meta!

So many different viable builds,

endless possibilities and the excitement

of trying to outguess your opponent each game!

Now it's just the haves vs the have nots

and what they "have" is an 8/7 with charge, drain, and ward for 3 mana!

You can't play around this,

there's no counter to it except getting there first!

I was so excited for this set to drop,

I saved up my gold and soul gems-

now only two cards even matter.

My sorcerer,

my beautiful midrange archer that I put so much work into...

They're just trash now, soul trap fodder.

What good is Unstoppable Rage

when opp's lanes are full of cheap giant monsters

and they still have mana left over to javelin?

Don't worry, Gerda, you can still play arena.

Deck building is no fun any more.

I feel like Ulfric when he was lost in Alduin's Mist.

It's all over.

I'm selling my account.

All our dreams of attracting Hearthstone veterans and passing up Shadowverse

have been wiped out by two little cards.

Let's see what's on Steam sale.

