We’re fast approaching that time of year again which means it’s time to whip out the credit cards and start your Christmas shopping. But what do you buy the football fan in your life? The chances are that a football related gift would go down a treat, but apart from the obvious club merchandise what else is there available? No matter whether you’re buying for your mum, dad, brother, sister, partner, best friend or any other football fan you know, here are some gift ideas that would be perfect to wrap up and put under the Christmas tree.

1) Football Manager 2015

Forget FIFA and Pro Evo, Football Manager is the best football gaming series available on the market. Fact! Every football fan claims that they can do better than the manager of their club, well now is there chance to prove it. Like in the previous Football Manager titles, Football Manager 2015 is the closest you can get to being a real life football manager, giving the player control over team selections, tactics, team-talks, transfers, training regimes, the list is endless. I guarantee that every football fan would be entertained for hours on end when they wake up with this game in their stocking come Christmas morning.

2) Football shirt styled kit bag

These football kit bags are the perfect present for the football fan who likes to stand out from the crowd. Made from recycled football shirts means that they are both stylish and environmentally friendly and are perfect for going to football training, a trip to the gym or a weekend away. A whole host of different designs are available to suit all tastes. As well as kit bags, there are also messenger style bags, shopping bags and lady’s handbags so there really is a bag for everybody.

3) Desktop mini football table

Everyone likes a game of table football no matter how young or old you are. Bring your living room to life this Christmas with this mini football game and even add that competitive edge with tournaments between family and friends.

4) The Nowhere Men

An obvious choice for a football book would be the current bestselling autobiography, however I think The Nowhere Men would be a more unique gift and an equally gripping read. Offering a fantastic insight into the world of the UK scouting network and winner of The Times British Sports Book Award 2014, it will be bound to please anybody who likes to read. A teenage boy plays football in a suburban park. His name is Raheem Sterling. The call is made: “Get down here quick. This is something special”. The Nowhere Men gives credit to the faceless and nameless football scouts who often make key decisions worth millions of pounds.

5) Gillette Soccer Saturday DVD

The boys at Soccer Saturday are what make Saturday afternoons so special for those who can’t make it to a match. This DVD compiles all the golden and hilariously funny moments from the past twenty years with unseen footage from Jeff Stelling, Chris ‘Unbelievable’ Kamara and the rest of the gang. The ultimate gift and stocking filler that will make all football fans laugh out loud.

6) Personalised Calendar-Football Star

If you’re thinking of buying that special someone a calendar this Christmas then look no further. Every football fan dreams of making it as a player and this calendar makes that dream come true. Fully customisable with first and last names and shirt number and colour, your loved one will see their name appear on the scoreboard, in the cup final line up and on the back pages of the newspaper.

7) Retro football shirt

Go back in time to the good old days with a retro styled football shirt. Grab a piece of history with Bobby Moore’s No6 England shirt just like the one he wore when he lifted the World Cup for England in 1966. Or maybe go for a shirt iconic in a club’s history. They’re really is a vast selection to choose from with domestic clubs, European and international clubs and even national teams available to choose from. Whatever you go the recipient will not be disappointed as each shirt is made to the highest quality. They’re not just football shirts, they’re pieces of history.

8) Subbuteo bottle opener

When watching football on the TV there’s only one thing that could make it better: watching the game with an ice cold bottle of beer. The problem is how to open that bottle beer, well here’s your answer, the Subbuteo bottle opener. Inspired by the original 1960’s Subbuteo figure this novelty yet practical piece of barware is the perfect gift for all football mad fans.

Please note I am not being endorsed by any company to promote their products, these are just items that I think would make good gifts for football fans. Also note that prices are correct at the time of publishing and may vary.