One Year at WaterMelon: The Movie (OYAWM) will chronicle the love, sweat, and tears over the next year of WaterMelon team's development pursuits. Everything from Pier Solar HD to our new Super Nintendo and SEGA Mega Drive/Genesis games, ProjectN and ProjectY. We promise it's going to be chock full of excitment, action, and some serious climactic twists.

You can rest assured that we are going to fill it to the brim with special features such as: the history of WaterMelon, interviews, and tons of other exclusive and exciting footage!

How to Unlock One Year at WaterMelon: The Movie?

One Year at WaterMelon: The Movie will be unlocked and free for EVERY single backer if the campaign reaches 175k. Upon reaching 175k, every single backer will receive an HD digital download of OYAWM! This is of course in addition to the Android and OUYA stretch goals!



If the campaign reaches 200k, not only will we release Pier Solar for HD and does every single backer receive the HD digital download of OYAWM, but all backers pledging $49 and above will receive a Kickstarter exclusive special edition DVD (you get the HD download of the film too!).

UPDATE #9: Pier Solar HD is Now Coming to the Wii U



UPDATE #8: 175k Down, Almost to Wii U and Limited Special Edition DVD's of OYAWM!



UPDATE #7: SURPRISES - One Year at WaterMelon: The Movie & ADD-ONS

UPDATE #6: First Two Stretch Goals Locked in: Japanese Translation & Dreamcast Extras are in!

UPDATE #5: Stretch Goals: Wii U, the Directors Cut, Android & OUYA, Japanese Translation, Dreamcast Extras



UPDATE #4: You did it!



UPDATE #3: Pier Solar AMA on Reddit with Gwenael Godde aka Fonzie - WM's Art Guy



UPDATE #2: Almost 100k! New Pledges and Pledge Updates - EVERYONE READ!

UPDATE #1: Original 16-bit SEGA Mega Drive/Genesis Graphics in Pier Solar HD!

Pier Solar is a 16-bit RPG that tells the story of Hoston, a young botanist who is on a quest to save his father from a mysterious illness. Along with his two best friends Alina and Edessot, the three friends embark on a quest seeking a rare herb to cure the illness of Hoston's father. Little do they know, it is the beginning of a winding journey that unravels his father's past and the mystery of Pier Solar and the Great Architects.

Pier Solar was originally designed and developed for the SEGA Mega Drive & SEGA Genesis. Yes, you read that right!! It was actually the only newly developed game for SEGA's 16-bit system in the new millennium. It's not a port, fan translation, or a copy of any other game. Pier Solar is a 100% brand new, entirely original,16-bit RPG.

We'll get right in to what we think makes Pier Solar so special:

The Biggest 16-bit RPG Ever! We released Pier Solar on a custom 64MEG cartridge (the average SEGA Mega Drive/Genesis game size is 12MEG), making it the biggest 16-bit RPG ever! This allowed us to push the 16-bit medium to a precedent setting level, with state-of-the-art aesthetics and things like full-screen cutscenes, background scaling and 3D modes.

A 100% Original RPG! Pier Solar was developed from the ground up. An original world, storyline, soundtrack, characters, enemies, and battle style. No ports, translations or copying from any other game - it's all fresh! The first original 16-bit RPG to do this in over a decade!

A Massive World to Explore! Pier Solar has 50+ hours of gameplay, over 300 locations, nearly 500 unique treasure chests, and over 800 NPCs!

Epic Battle Tactics! We developed an innovative battle system that puts you in control of up to five characters and includes in-depth strategic moves such as counter-attacks and a special strategy called Gather, which stores energy to unleash even more powerful moves and spells!

Translated in 5 Languages! Pier Solar is translated in 5 languages: English, Spanish, Portuguese, French, and German.

An Original Soundtrack! A beautiful soundtrack written just for Pier Solar that embodies everything great about a classic retro soundtrack!

There Are Surprises! We also packed-in many other surprises and secrets like hidden areas and mini-games!

Pier Solar truly is a love letter to the rich, imaginative 16-bit RPGs of a bygone era. We crafted Pier Solar in the same light - with an authentic adventure, that resonates deeply about life, death, love, family, and friendship. Remember the wonder you felt when immersed into your favorite retro RPG? Pier Solar captures that same wonder.

Here is what some of the press has to say about Pier Solar:

After 2 years, 3 prints, and 8 versions of Pier Solar for the SEGA Mega Drive & SEGA Genesis - we are pleased to announce we have been hard at work on releasing Pier Solar in HD for Xbox 360, PC, Mac, Linux & SEGA Dreamcast.

From day one we've been getting requests to bring Pier Solar to platforms like Xbox 360. We've been listening carefully to you and we are very excited to bring Pier Solar to you on more platforms than ever before! The thing is, we don't just want to re-release Pier Solar on some new platforms. We want to redo the game in HD so it looks as stunning as it should. We are putting the same level of attention and detail into Pier Solar HD that we put into our original development. Trust us, it's going to be amazing.

The game will remain the same in essence - you'll still have everything that makes Pier Solar great (including the translations of 5 languages in every version!) - we will simply be redoing the graphics in high definition and releasing it on each respective platform so that everyone can play it! Of course we'll be adding some new things here and there, like achievements and trophies for Xbox 360. We'll take advantage of each platform and make it fit right.

We've been hard at work and we already have Pier Solar up and running on Xbox 360, PC, and SEGA Dreamcast (in the original SD resolution). We put together a video of each platform working so you can see we are well on our way! Watch the video here.

When we first sat down to conceptualize Pier Solar HD, one of our initial goals was to adapt the new HD art direction with our preexisting 16-bit gameplay. We did this by merging the rich charm of retro sprites with crisp HD backgrounds. The sharp blend of each art style unites to provide an enchanting, aesthetic atmosphere never before seen. Sure, other developers have made "modernized" retro, pixel based games - but as far as we know, never before has a game been developed entirely with a mixture of both art styles, from beginning to end. This is one of the most exciting aspects of Pier Solar HD and we think it is going to send every player straight to retro heaven.



Take a look at these before and after Standard Definition to High Definition images so you can see just how beautiful Pier Solar is going to look in HD! We are so excited!!

A rich and beautiful art style

Hoston's house, where the adventure begins.

HD is awesome, look at this atmosphere!

Splendid visual with a blend of pixel art for a unique style.

Beautiful, crisp HD backgrounds.

Sharper HD graphics makes the cutscenes look even more gorgeous.

Working directly with fans is an idea that is intertwined at the very core of what WaterMelon is. Our origins and history as a company have been uniquely connected with our fans. Today, we are more connected with them than ever. Just take a look at our recently launched WM's Magical Game Factory where we are building entire games directly based on what YOU want!



We fit right in around here and that's why we are running this campaign. We're coming directly to you to make Pier Solar HD a reality. This allows us to do our work exactly how it should be done - with no compromises! With your help, we can bring Pier Solar in high definition to five new platforms! Furthermore, we will give you behind the scenes access to our world of development as we work. We want you to be right by our side. As a backer of our campaign, you'll get access to all sorts of behind the scenes extras. We'll make it worth your while!

With Pier Solar already up and running on Xbox 360, SEGA Dreamcast and PC we are already hard at work on the development.

So what exactly will the funding be used for? All funding strictly goes toward:

Remaking thousands and thousands of Pier Solar assets in HD

Licensing fees, extra development costs

Production (plastic molds, printing)

Beta testing for Xbox 360, PC, Mac, Linux and SEGA Dreamcast

To fulfill our funding goal, we have a lineup of pledges that are sure to offer something for everybody. Not only do we have pre-orders for every version of Pier Solar HD, but we have some bundles of awesomeness that you won't be able to pass up! See the pledge section for all the pretty details.

WaterMelon is a video game development company committed to bringing you the best in old school gaming entertainment. We started in 2004 with an idea - to make an entirely original, 16-bit RPG for the SEGA Mega Drive & SEGA Genesis. After 6 years of love, the result was Pier Solar and the Great Architects. Fast forward to today and take a look at how much we've grown.

Today, WM's offices and our team of 6 are located in Iowa, USA. With distribution centers in both the USA and Europe - we deliver all of our games and products worldwide and have shipped to over 50 countries to date.

One of our latest and most exciting projects is WM's Magical Game Factory. It is a unique approach to crowd driven development. The Factory allows fans to invest in various proposed projects and have a real impact on the games development throughout the project’s life cycle. Players can purchase GEMS and apply them to any project they wish. The more GEMS they’ve invested in a project, the more weight is given to their votes and opinions when consulted. Once the project is completed, investors will not only get a copy of the game but a host of other goodies and exclusive bonuses.

The philosophical roots behind WaterMelon are burrowed in our love for old school gaming. We think the development limitations of retro video game systems from the 90's created a unique context that often caused developers to place compelling story telling and innovative game play at the very top of their development. We think it is through this principle that the very best of games have been made.

Today, with the same recycled blockbuster video games over and over again ad nauseum - it is now that a principled approach is needed most. At WaterMelon, we distill the 'old school gaming' essence of compelling story telling and innovative gameplay into our fundamental and driving principle as a company. We won't sacrifice this principle - no matter what.

If you are familiar with the way we package our products - you know we put our hearts and souls into delivering the highest caliber of packaging possible. In fact, after 1UP.com reviewed Pier Solar their opinion was, "The packaging/presentation for the game is exceptional". For the SEGA Mega Drive & SEGA Genesis version of Pier Solar we actually designed and manufactured every single piece of it in house, from the ground up. This is a big deal! Check out this gallery of our packaging so you can see exactly how good it really is.



Now the reason we are pointing this out is because this exact caliber of quality follows for each and every one of our pledges below. We carefully crafted each pledge to be the most beautifully designed, collectible offerings we could dream up. You won't be disappointed, we promise.

Oh and one last note on our PC, Mac, Linux & SEGA Dreamcast collector editions: These will be the most limited and collectible versions ever produced on either of these platforms at 250 and 750 limited edition units respectively. To put it in perspective, when we first released Pier Solar for SEGA Mega Drive and SEGA Genesis - we sold out similar quantities in less than 2 weeks on sale and these original print versions went on to be extremely rare and valuable. In fact, so rare and valuable that whenever they come up for resale, you'll find them selling for $500+! Don't miss out on these special editions - they are going to move fast!

Pier Solar HD for XBOX 360

The second we released Pier Solar we started receiving requests to release it for Xbox 360. We do understand that not everyone out there has SEGA Mega Drive or SEGA Genesis to play Pier Solar. The Xbox 360 version will of course be in a crisp, lush HD. We will add trophies and other unique Xbox 360 features, don't worry! The pledge is for a digital version of the game.

Pier Solar HD for PC, Mac & Linux - Digital Version, Regular Edition and Collectors Edition

Don't you hate it when an intriguing new game gets released on PC and you have a Mac or vice versa? What about if you use Linux? We want everyone to play it so we will by releasing it on all computer OS's for everybody from the get go! Pier Solar HD will be compatible on PC, Mac & Linux.



We've got three pledges for this one - a digital download and two physical editions: the regular edition and the collectors edition. The collectors edition is a beautiful physical package that includes Pier Solar HD - (compatible with PC, Mac & Linux), the Pier Solar Guide Book, a signed art print, and three beautiful figurines. A Kickstarter exclusive, limited to 250! There is one pledge that serves for all 3 versions. We will send you a survey to select which OS you want later.

Pier Solar for SEGA Dreamcast - Regular Edition and Collectors Edition

We can't help it. We just love our old school SEGA systems too much :). The Dreamcast is one of our favorites and we know there are tons of fans out there just like us! The truth is, we've wanted to release Pier Solar for SEGA Dreamcast for a long time. With the Dreamcast's lacking RPG library, it is going to be a great fit!



We are thrilled to utilize the redone HD graphics for the Dreamcast version. They will be scaled down to the Dreamcast's optimal resolution of 640x480 and VGA compatible too. It is going to look incredible, you can trust us when we say its going to look as good as possible on the Dreamcast (which is damn good!).

We have two pledges for the Dreamcast version of Pier Solar - the regular edition and the collectors edition. Both the regular and collectors edition are available in each region's authentic, unique packaging: USA, European and Japanese. The limited edition will include a beautiful physical package that includes Pier Solar for the SEGA Dreamcast (You get to choose whichever version you want: either USA, European or Japanese versions), the Pier Solar Guide Book, a signed art print, and three beautiful figurines.

The SEGA Dreamcast packaging will be designed and manufactured from the ground up, in house by WaterMelon! Each regions packaging will match your collection! A Kickstarter exclusive, limited to 750! There is one pledge that serves for all 3 versions. We will send you a survey to select which region you want later.

Pier Solar Original Soundtrack (4 CD Set)

The Definitive Original Soundtrack - everything a fan could dream of! In a stunning packaging with four BUNG-FULL discs, that can be played in any CD player, computer or even your Mega-CD/SEGA CD. We have roughly 750 Pier Solar OST's left and once these are gone - they'll be gone for ever, no more reprints! Limited to 750!

Discs 1-2 contain the game's original Mega-CD/SEGA CD tracks.

Disc 3 contains remixes by famous artists, rare unused tracks & alternates.

Disc 4 is our famous Enhanced Soundtrack Disc, the Mega-CD/SEGA CD disc to be played with any Pier Solar cartridge! This disc also includes PC accessible exclusive content like "making of" and other things.

The Pier Solar Guidebook

The ultimate Pier Solar strategy guide. It is based on tim333's fabulous GameFAQs guide, revised and updated. A beautiful, full color strategy guide that serves as your companion to every version of Pier Solar. It is published in English, but there will also be smaller appendixes with other languages as well.

A Pier Solar SEGA Dreamcast System



A SEGA Dreamcast system custom branded with Pier Solar artwork. It will include the custom system, controller and VMU. A Kickstarter exclusive, limited to 5!



A Pier Solar Xbox 360 SystemWe’ll build you a beautiful, custom Xbox 360 system custom branded with Pier Solar artwork on the system and controller. It will be a brand new Xbox 360 with 250 GB system or Xbox 360 with Kinect. We’ll send a survey for you to choose your version. You also get to pick ANY version of Pier Solar HD too! We'll let you pick via a survey later. A Kickstarter exclusive, limited to 10!



Any Collectors Edition and a Limited Poster



Any Collector’s Edition of your choice plus an exclusive, kickstarter limited poster made in super high quality material. Limited and numbered to 150 total. 30in x 22in (55cm x 76 cm).



Early Beta Tester



You'll get a Pier Solar Collector’s version of your choice and you'll be invited to an exclusive early closed beta test before the open beta. We hope you aren't afraid of bugs. Kickstarter Exclusive, limited to 50.



Pier Solar Mega Drive “Classic Edition”



Three different versions of Pier Solar for SEGA Mega Drive and SEGA Genesis have been released since 2010 and The Classic Edition is out of print and one of the most collectible versions. You get a collectors edition of Pier Solar HD of your choice plus the choice of whichever Pier Solar Classic version you want: USA, Europe, or Japanese packaging and we will sign it for you! We will send you a survey to select which region(s) you want later.



Bethina’s Diary - 150+ pages of original Pier Solar work



This is something totally special and unique. You get the two Pier Solar HD collector’s boxes (PC/MAC/LINUX AND Dreamcast) plus something totally special and unique: One of the two independently unique work books, filled with 100% original pieces, no copies. 150+ pages of artwork, drawings, proof printings, script, sketches, technical notes and more. Each book itself is made of original raw material, assembled by hand and stitched as an antique book. The book cover is made of Pier Solar packaging compound. Many pages are annotated by hand. Additionally it contains three 100x100 laser-cuts of original printing plates, annotated, numbered and signed. Includes a Certificate of Authenticity. Protected by custom wood and artboard casing. A Kickstarter exclusive, limited to 2!



The Pier Solar Prototype Package



Original Pier Solar Prototypes! You get the Collector’s Edition box of your choice plus the original Pier Solar Prototypes! Includes Prototype cartridge, Prototype mega CD disc, Beta Testing A4 sheet (the sheet beta testers have used) and a Certificate of Authenticity. Protected by custom wood and artboard casing making it a true collector’s treasure. A Kickstarter exclusive, limited to 5!



I Am the Boss! (be in the game)



You get a Collector’s Edition of your choice and we will design you as the big boss in Pier Solar based off a picture that you submit! All the games we make (physical and digital) will feature you as an unlockable boss and you will receive an exclusive code that is used in game to activate this feature, so that you can challenge your friends to beat you! Also includes a custom cover with you as the big boss on it as well as the original signed sketch! This feature will be compatible with all versions of the game. A Kickstarter exclusive, limited to 10!



Plates of Posterity



One of a kind collectors pieces. You get a Collector's Edition of your choice plus one of a kind collectors pieces. A 100x100mm laser-cut of the original printing plates, annotated, numbered and signed. Includes a certificate of Authenticity. Protected in custom artboard casing. A Kickstarter exclusive, limited to 25!



The Super Collector Package



The be all, end all collectors package! All three super rare posterity versions of Pier Solar for SEGA Genesis/MegaDrive (USA, EU, JP), all 3 SEGA Dreamcast versions (USA, EU, JP), the Pier Solar OST, the Pier Solar Guide Book, and the both Pier Solar reprint editions. Every item signed by the developers. A Kickstarter exclusive, limited to 1!

Come Party with us in Paris!

For our biggest fan – get the OST and all physical versions of the game (PC and Dreamcast in all 3 regions, plus a PC collector’s box and the Dreamcast Collectors box in all 3 regions as well. Total of 8 games) plus an exclusive invite for you and as many friends as you'd like you to come party with us in Paris! You and your friends will have an exclusive invite to a launch party for Pier Solar HD. Afterward we will have a beautiful dinner in Paris followed by drinks and a real good time! (We will pay the round trip airplane tickets for you and hand you the invitations for all the friends that you invite.)