The deal ends a drawn-out battle that began last year and turned hostile for several months after Roche's initial bid was rejected. The financial crisis then struck, casting doubts about the takeover. Roche later increased its offer after meeting with Genentech investors. The new deal gives the Basel-based firm 44 per cent of Genentech that it did not already control and creates a sales force of about 3,000 people. Roche will now control Genentech's popular cancer drugs Avastin and Herceptin. Executives estimate annual revenues from the two companies should be around $17 billion.

Board members at Genentech, a California-based company, agreed to sell Roche all outstanding shares for $95 each in cash. It is one of the most expensive deals in the history of the Swiss economy.

Copyright

All rights reserved. The content of the website by swissinfo.ch is copyrighted. It is intended for private use only. Any other use of the website content beyond the use stipulated above, particularly the distribution, modification, transmission, storage and copying requires prior written consent of swissinfo.ch. Should you be interested in any such use of the website content, please contact us via contact@swissinfo.ch.

As regards the use for private purposes, it is only permitted to use a hyperlink to specific content, and to place it on your own website or a website of third parties. The swissinfo.ch website content may only be embedded in an ad-free environment without any modifications. Specifically applying to all software, folders, data and their content provided for download by the swissinfo.ch website, a basic, non-exclusive and non-transferable license is granted that is restricted to the one-time downloading and saving of said data on private devices. All other rights remain the property of swissinfo.ch. In particular, any sale or commercial use of these data is prohibited.

Reuse article

Roche buys Genentech for $46.8 billion Mar 12, 2009 - 09:12 Swiss drug maker Roche has struck a deal with shareholders to purchase biotech group Genentech for $46.8 billion (SFr54.11 billion). Board members at Genentech, a California-based company, agreed to sell Roche all outstanding shares for $95 each in cash. It is one of the most expensive deals in the history of the Swiss economy. The deal ends a drawn-out battle that began last year and turned hostile for several months after Roche's initial bid was rejected. The financial crisis then struck, casting doubts about the takeover. Roche later increased its offer after meeting with Genentech investors. The new deal gives the Basel-based firm 44 per cent of Genentech that it did not already control and creates a sales force of about 3,000 people. Roche will now control Genentech's popular cancer drugs Avastin and Herceptin. Executives estimate annual revenues from the two companies should be around $17 billion.