Can somebody please reblog this and tag samsungnote7pussy? I need her and the people like her to read this.

There have been almost 200 dead people for daring to stand in the streets and say “we don’t want this. 19 people died in election day, none older than 22. For daring to say that we want to be a democratic republic. Of those 200 only 4 were older than 30

My mother is facing unemployment, just because she didn’t vote. That means that I, a informal worker will have to maintain a three person house. But the fact that we’re brown is more important than the fact that we can’t eat anything but yucca and that two of us have anemia because of that.

Oh yeah, and all that free healthcare that we can’t use because its fucking worthless and the doctors are not being paid! And of course the medicines that can’t be found anywhere.

You know what is the real number of voters in the election? 200,000. That’s how many voters they had the last Time. But imbeciles like you will believe that 8 million number, because identity politics.

Because the poor are well known for the knowledge of politics.

El hijo de la maria, a literal thug and one of those representatives, proposed to “abolish the dollar” to be able to import stuff with bolivars. The representatives for education? Proposed to stop grading kids because it is “classicist and stressful”. Every single proposition is worse than the last. They’re going to ruin our country. Because they’re ignorant, retarded idiots without education that believe that the system has the fault for all their problems.

With this new constitution I can be given 40 years in prison with forced labor, because I’m telling you this. A murderer gets 8 and no labor.



And if you’re planning to tell me to check my sources, have in mind that all I need to do to confirm my sources is to go out my door.



You’re defending a true fascist government. But the fact that there are women in a unconstitutional group to violate the constitution is more important that our lives.



PD: ALSO, this is one of the most homophobic govs we’ve ever had. They have used us and promised to legalize marriage and help us. Instead they raid reunion places and rape the people they capture before sending them to die in jail.

So you, your people and anyone who thinks like you. Please, shut up and go fuck yourself