Twenty years after the Olympics took place in Atlanta, a U.S. national team will be training in the city thanks to the threat of the Zika virus.

In a letter issued by USA's Swimming National Team Director Frank Busch, pre-Olympic training will move from Puerto Rico to the Georgia Tech Campus Recreation Center, formerly known as the Georgia Tech Aquactic Center, due to the possibility of exposure to the athletes.

As part of our preparations for the Olympic Games this summer, we have been closely monitoring the current situation with the Zika virus. According to the CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) and other health experts in the field of science and medicine, our athletes would be highly exposed to the Zika virus in Puerto Rico. USA Swimming’s most important priority is the health and safety of our Olympic Team. With this information, the National Team Division has decided to relocate the second camp to Atlanta, GA. Many variables were considered in selecting this location: flight time to Rio, time zone, facility and hotel availability, and training camp atmosphere. The team’s first camp will remain in San Antonio, TX.

Sign up for the daily Speed Feed Newsletter Thank You Something went wrong. This email will be delivered to your inbox once a day in the morning. Thank You for signing up for the Speed Feed Please try again later.

Submit

We will also educate Olympic Team members about Zika and provide them with multiple tools to reduce the risk of being bitten by mosquitos while in Rio.

Our partners at Marriott helped us greatly in this transition process and we know the new location will meet our needs. Team culture is one of the things that sets Team USA apart. We want to make sure our camp creates that unity as we head into the Olympic Games.

The team is scheduled to hold its first training camp in San Antonio, from July 11 through July 21, before heading to Georgia Tech's campus.

During the 1996 games, the center featured competitions in swimming, synchronized swimming, diving and water polo. The pool itself is made up of 10, 50 meter by 25 meter lanes and holds 1.08 million gallons of water.

Since then, the center has been turned into a recreational facility for Georgia Tech students and facility.

The Olympics are set to kick off in Rio de Janeiro on Saturday, August 6.

PHOTOS | The fight against Zika