UPDATE: Man arrested at Grand Blanc theater with gun, body armor and fake CIA ID has concealed weapon license suspended

GRAND BLANC TWP, MI -- Grand Blanc Township police arrested a Flint man Tuesday at the NCG Trillium theater who was wearing body armor, carrying a loaded gun with multiple rounds of ammunition and a suspected fake federal identification badge.

Cassidy Delavergne was charged and arraigned in federal court Wednesday, July 31, with having a fake CIA identification card, said Grand Blanc Township Detective Matt Harburn.

The detective said officers were called by the theater, located at 8220 Trillium Circle Avenue, on Tuesday, July 30, around 8:20 p.m. regarding a man with a gun. Delavergne was in a theater watching a movie when the officers approached him and asked him to step outside. Harburn says that is when Delavergne claimed to be a federal agent.

"They were confident that wasn't true, and that's when they arrested him." Harburn said.

Authorities say Delavergne was wearing body armor and carrying a loaded Beretta 9mm pistol along with an extra magazine of ammunition containing 17 rounds.

According to federal court records, the FBI was contacted by the Grand Blanc Township Police Department about the identification. Delavergne told the FBI agent he went to the theater after work wearing his gun and body armor because he did not want to leave them in his car. Federal court documents say he told FBI agents that he had a permit to carry a concealed firearm.

Delavergne also told the FBI agent the CIA credentials he was carrying were fake, and he flashed the badge at the theater so theater patrons wouldn't be alarmed about the firearm he was carrying, according to court records. He then said he showed the badge to the officers to avoid legal trouble, court documents say.

The FBI agent said a later search of Delavergne's car and found an additional 111 rounds of 9mm ammunition.

Theater representatives could not immediately be reached for comment.