Excluding the revenant elite specialization, the release of Shiro Tagachi marks the end of the core legend reveals. With the previous three fulfilling distinct roles of defence, support and conditions it was inevitable that a damage orientated legend was needed. As will be revealed in an official blog post later today, Shiro will be a dark and sinister legend who focuses on slashing attacks and mobility. Best of all, revenant’s will be able to dual-wield swords to match Shiro’s iconic blades.

In his blog post, Roy Cronacher details that the principal behind Shiro is pure destruction with the sword skills providing a mixture of rapid attacks that match the assassin theme of this famous Guild Wars legend. There are three skills detailed by Roy:

1. Unrelenting Assault unleashes a fierce attack on nearby foes, allowing the revenant to shadowstep to enemies in the vicinity to deliver strikes. The revenant will also gain might each time they strike a foe. If you’re wondering, this is the skill that Rytlock uses in the infamous trailer for Heart of Thorns.

2. Precision Strike attacks nearby foes, sending out blades that damage and chill them.

3. Rift Slash attacks foes and creats a rift on them that explodes for additional damage after a short period of time. Any foes struck by Rift Slash are affected and this skill in particular is the third in the auto attack chain.

As well as the above weapon skills, there are a couple that have been teased. As seen in the image below, Enchanted Daggers is your heal skill and strikes your target as you attack, siphoning health from damaged foes. The jagged daggers float and follow the revenant and will attack as you do.

Alongside Enchanted Daggers, Jade Wind allows the revenant - similarly to Shiro in Guild Wars - to turn foes into jade for a short period of time. When downed, you’ll also be able to select a trait that triggers the release the Jade Wind. There’s no word on how long players are turned into jade for or if it will break when they receive damage (similarly to Moa) but it certainly sounds a great skill.

Finally, Phase Traversal allows the revenant to travel through the Mists to a target and make several unblockable attacks.

Shiro Stance

Although we don’t know exactly how powerful Shiro will be in comparison to the other legends, I think it’s fair to say that the profession is likely to receive a significant jump in their damage output. Dual-wielding swords always looks incredible and it sounds as though the design team have put significant thought into making Shiro a mobile and deadly legend that’s capable of dealing significant damage but also getting out alive.

If you want to see the new revenant legend in action, you can watch it this Friday when Roy Cronacher joins host Rubi Bayer on Points of Interest at 12 p.m. PDT on the official Guild Wars 2 Twitch channel (http://www.twitch.tv/guildwars2). In addition, if you want to play the revenant and all the core legends during one of the upcoming beta events you can pre-purchase Heart of Thorns over on the official website.