As the end of the 2012 NFL season comes to a miserable end for the Kansas City Chiefs, the rumors of who could replace KC’s embattled GM Scott Pioli are beginning to heat up.

And that replacement could be former Colts executive Bill Polian.

We told you on December 8th that there was a rumor Polian could be heading to the Chiefs. That report came from the National Football Post.

Now we have another source.

Jason La Canfora of CBS Sports is backing up the NFP report with one of his own.

As for those more well-known entities, several league sources expect Bill Polian to be a lead candidate in Kansas City if a regime change is made there, with he and his son Chris, the former Colts GM, able to run the franchise in a very hands-on manner, which is in line with how owner Clark Hunt traditionally delegates responsibility.

This would be a smart move for Clark Hunt. Polian has been involved in turning around three franchises during his time as an executive. As Gm of the Bills from 1986-1993, Polian took over a 2-14 team and took them to three straight Super Bowls. Buffalo lost all three of them and Polian was fired.

Polian emerged again as the GM of the new Carolina Panthers franchise. He took the team to the NFC Championship game in only its second year of existence.

Polian left the Panthers to become the President of the Indianapolis Colts in 1997. The Colts had the #1 overall pick in the draft that year and Polian selected none other than Peyton Manning.

Polian began grooming his son Chris in 1998 when he made him Director of Pro Personnel in Indy. Chris was later promoted to GM.

Hiring Polian would be a brilliant move by Hunt. He’d be getting an experienced executive and personnel man but at the same time, he’d be getting the younger Chris Polian as well. Polian senior was 69 when the Colts fired him in January. He likely won’t be with the Chiefs for long but he certainly could stick around long enough to get the franchise back on track.

The Chiefs make sense for Polian as well. The roster has plenty of talent, the team has ample cap space and more importantly, they will likely hold the #1 pick in the draft. It would be a great opportunity for Polian to take his already cemented legacy and dip it in gold.

The good news for the Chiefs is that if Clark Hunt is indeed interested in Polian that he will be able to hire him whenever he wants. Since Polian isn’t under contract with any other NFL teams, he’s a free agent so to speak. If the Chiefs want to move on from Pioli, they’ll need to move quickly to give their new GM the time he needs to have a solid offseason.

What do you think, Addicts? Will Clark Hunt hire Bill and Chris Polian?