FITNESS fanatics and nature lovers rejoice – the long-awaited Green Arrow walking track in Whitfield is finally open.

Today, Cairns Regional Council will officially open the path, created from a former network of “goat tracks” on previously privately owned land.

It will connect with the ­existing Blue Arrow, and traverse Mt Whitfield ridge to join with Whitfield’s Bel-air and East Parkridge drives.

media_camera Cairns councillor Linda Cooper has been instrumental in the creation of the Green Arrow walking track, due to open today. PICTURE: SUPPLIED

Some sections of the track reportedly offer walkers 360-degree views.

Touted as a way for locals and visitors to experience the tranquillity of the rainforest without leaving Cairns City, the 3.5km track has been more than four years in the making.

The total cost to the council, which also includes the upgrade of the existing Red and Blue Arrow walking tracks, is about $267,000.

Division 6 Councillor Linda Cooper, who was instrumental in the Green Arrow’s creation, said the bushland surrounding the path was very nearly sold for housing development.

“That piece of land ... up to four years ago was privately owned and I was made aware the owners had a development application with the council to build residences,” she said.

“The property came up for sale and ... myself and the CEO went through a process of ­acquisition and it became council land, rezoned from residential to open space.

“The scenic rim of our city is really important to protect those environmental values and to protect that green space.”

Bickering among State Government politicians over funding for the track after the last election marred the project slightly.

media_camera The view over Whitfield and Edge hill to Cairns CBD and Trinity Inlet from the Green Arrow track. PICTURE: STEWART McLEAN

The previous LNP Government had promised a “fully funded and costed allocation of $500,000” to create the path, but only if it was re-elected.

The new Labor Government, meanwhile, has said the funding was never there, and was dependent on the LNP raising revenue through selling state assets.

Cr Cooper said in July the council had progressed with work because the state funding was based on an election promise, rather than any contractual arrangement with the previous or current government.

She said the track would give locals and visitors another way to experience the “great outdoors”.

“It’s there to make the most of what’s already a commonly used exercise circuit,” she said.

“When tourists ask ‘where can I walk near the city?’, I know of a lot of hotels that point them to that area.

“A lot of airline staff also use that as their exercise route when they come to town.”

“It’s part of the ongoing preservation of that open- space area that the community can enjoy without impeding on private property.”