





(left, Mossad cutout conveniently leaves his calling card)











With France taking measures decisively sympathetic to Islam,



why would Muslim zealots suddenly choose THIS MOMENT to



murder a dozen French citizens, an act that would



certainly turn French public opinion against Muslims and in



favor of Israel?















(Latest- Even BBC admits attack may have been fake)



---------- Jewish Insider Reveals How Mossad Staged It















" Wake up, my fellow Christians. You are under insidious attack by the Illuminati: a secret oligarchy of Jews and Freemasons. Don't be deceived by the media which they own."



"IT IS FROM US THAT THE ALL-ENGULFING TERROR PROCEEDS. WE HAVE IN OUR SERVICE PERSONS OF ALL OPINIONS, OF ALL DOCTRINES,... MONARCHISTS, DEMAGOGUES, SOCIALISTS, COMMUNISTS, AND UTOPIAN DREAMERS OF EVERY KIND. We have harnessed them all to the task: EACH ONE OF THEM ON HIS OWN ACCOUNT IS BORING AWAY AT THE LAST REMNANTS OF AUTHORITY, IS STRIVING TO OVERTHROW ALL ESTABLISHED FORM OF ORDER. By these acts all States are in torture; they exhort to tranquility, are ready to sacrifice everything for peace: BUT WE WILL NOT GIVE THEM PEACE UNTIL THEY OPENLY ACKNOWLEDGE OUR INTERNATIONAL SUPER-GOVERNMENT, AND WITH SUBMISSIVENESS." Protocol 9. Vs. 4. (Circa 1897.)













by James Perloff

(henrymakow.com)





It seems like they're spinning out PSYOPS these days faster than the writers of plots for a daily soap opera. Ottawa and Sydney are already old news.







The three latest headlines have probably been: the Charlie Hebdo shootings in France, the downed AirAsia plane, and "North Korea hacks Sony."







While no conclusive explanations have yet been reached, these three seemingly distinct events all have something in common: running afoul of Israel.





On December 2nd, the France Parliament passed a resolution asking that France recognize a Palestinian state. And just a week ago, Israel informed France that it was "deeply disappointed" with France's vote on a UN resolution that would have required Israeli forces to withdraw to their pre-1967 borders by 2017.



(Left. Teaching everyone to identify as Jews)



With France taking measures decisively sympathetic to Islam, why would Muslim zealots suddenly choose THIS MOMENT to murder a dozen French citizens, an act that would turn French public opinion against Muslims and in favor of Israel? We are told the motive for the atrocity was publication of cartoons satirizing Islam and Muhammad. What Muslim would consider cartoons more important than Palestinian rights, which Muslims have spent decades earnestly striving and bleeding for?





Clearly, the beneficiary of the Charlie Hebdo incident is neither France nor Islam, but Israel.



9-11



This was equally true of 9/11. Though allegedly carried out by Middle Eastern Muslims, they did not benefit - the U.S. has been making war on them ever since, and the Middle East has descended into chaos. Americans did not benefit - they have suffered the casualties and enormous costs of multiple wars, to say nothing of a growing police state at home. 9/11's SOLE BENEFICIARY is Israel - her enemies neutralized one by one, courtesy America.





We will not repeat here the widely discussed Israeli connections to 9/11. However, let's at least quote Francesco Cossiga, former President and Prime Minister of Italy: "All of the democratic areas of America and of Europe . . . now know full well that the disastrous attack [9/11] was planned and executed by the American CIA and Mossad with the help of the Zionist world, to falsely incriminate Arabic countries and to persuade the Western Powers to intervene in Iraq and Afghanistan."





The Charlie Hebdo shootings show some of the same "MO" as 9/11. A key 9/11 clue was alleged hijacker Satam al-Saqami's visa, found intact and unburned near the World Trade Center. Supposedly it somehow survived the explosion unscathed and made it to the ground. Then, of course, there were the Koran and flight training manual found in a car at Boston's Logan Airport. And the terrorists who visited a Daytona Beach strip club the night before the attacks, and bragged that America was about to see "bloodshed," conveniently leaving behind a Koran, a business card and other forms of ID.





Likewise, in the recent Paris shootings, police have identified the alleged perpetrators by means of an ID card which one of them CONVENIENTLY left in the getaway car.





Analysts have pointed out that the attack was carried out with military precision and skill. If you watch the footage of the getaway (shot by Amchai Stein, deputy editor of Israel's IBA Channel 1, who "just happened" to be on the scene), the perps wore hoods over their faces: they clearly did not want their identities known. Why, then, after all this precision, did they carelessly leave identification in the car? Could it be that the masked shooters were NOT the same men whom the ID card has sent the police chasing after? (Perhaps the Mossad believes all French detectives are Inspector Clouseaus, but more likely they rely on compliant Freemasons within Law Enforcement who will obey their Masonic oaths of absolute obedience and secrecy in exchange for promotions and other material rewards.)





A detailed, ongoing debunking of the Charlie Hebdo shootings may be found at: http://www.jimstonefreelance.com/.





AIR ASIA CRASH



Next, AirAsia. In a single year, 2014, Malaysia lost three airliners: MH370, MH17, and AirAsia 8501. All three were lost under very controversial circumstances.



Malaysia is also one of just four countries in the Far East that doesn't recognize Israel. More significantly, in late 2013, the Kuala Lumpur War Crimes Commission, chaired by Mahathir Mohamad (Malaysia's former prime minister), declared Israel guilty of war crimes and atrocities.





The other three Far Eastern countries that don't recognize Israel? Well, there's Indonesia, and Brunei (a small country on the island of Borneo, which is otherwise divided between Malaysia and Indonesia). 155 of Air Asia 8501's passengers were Indonesians.





Are France and Malaysia the victims of sophisticated Israeli vengeance? If such an idea seems farfetched, is it no more absurd than the government/MSM claim that MH370 simply "disappeared." If such brutality by Israel seems unthinkable, remember its slaughter of Gaza's civilians only last summer.









NORTH KOREA



And the fourth country of the Far East that doesn't recognize Israel? It's North Korea, who is now being punished with economic sanctions after its crackerjack team of computer geeks ran circles around the hayseeds in charge of Sony's security. And why shouldn't we believe the claims of government and mainstream media about that? After all, if Muslims will commit mass murder over a cartoon, wouldn't North Koreans hack us over a movie?





Wake up, my fellow Christians. You are under insidious attack by the Illuminati: a secret oligarchy of Jews and Freemasons. Don't be deceived by the media which they own. The political Israel of today is not the Israel of the Bible. It is a Luciferian counterfeit, engineered by the same Rothschild bankster cabal that has financed communism and world government. Ultimately, they want their beast to rule his totalitarian world from a throne in Jerusalem, pretending to be God (2 Thessalonians 2:3-4).



--------------------------



