The Panama Canal has connected the Pacific Ocean to the Atlantic Ocean via one of history's most incredible examples of large-scale engineering. People come from all over the world to witness the canal for themselves. Because Panama is a major hub for those traveling to South America, it's easy to make the most of your layover by booking a one-day tour to the Panama Canal. Before you go, try and get familiar with some of the facts surrounding this incredible place.

The Panama Canal Changed the World

Construction of the canal was begun by the French in 1880. Unfortunately many French and Panamanian people working on the canal's construction died from diseases such as yellow fever and malaria. This caused significant delays in construction and in 1904, the project was purchased taken over by the United States. The canal was completed in 1914. 14,000 vessels now pass through the Panama Canal each year, saving their crews the 7,900 mile trip they'd otherwise have to take around South America's southern tip.

The Three Places to View the Panama Canal

If you want to visit the Panama Canal, there are three main areas you can start from: Panama City, Gamboa and Colón. If you visit the canal from Panama City, where the country's international airport is, head to the Miraflores Visitor Center. To get there, take a bus from Albrook Bus Terminal to the Miraflores sign. From the sign, it's about a 15-minute walk to the visitor's center, and once you're there, you can head to the viewing platforms to admire the vessels passing through the canal or learn about the canal's history at the on-site museum.

Gamboa, a rainforest preserve just 20 minutes from the canal, was built to house the employees of the canal and their dependents. Gamboa lies on the Chagres River and is home to all kinds of tropical wildlife. You can see the canal from Gamboa, but if you take a tour from here, you will be taken to Miraflores as well. Lastly, you can head up Colón on the Atlantic Coast, and board the Panama Canal Railway which partially rides along the water.

It Takes 10 Hours to Pass Through the Canal

Ships need to be slowly and carefully navigated through the canal through a series of locks, a process which takes about ten hours. Some ships must also wait up to 25 hours for permission to begin their journey through the locks. The canal is used by vessels from all of the world, with a majority of trips being made by ships traveling between the east coast of the US and East Asia.

The Tolls are Expensive

Ships are charged a toll to pass through the canal based on their weight. On average this toll is about $150,000, though the largest sum ever paid to pass was $450,000, while the smallest amount was 36 cents, paid by a man named Richard Halliburton in 1928 who wanted to swim across. Luckily, if you want to enter the Miraflores Visitor Center to experience the canal, you'll only need to pay $15.

Take a Cruise on the Canal

Though some people may be fine with observing the canal from Miraflores or from another point, you can also have the unique experience of crossing through the canal yourself. There are many tour companies that run tour boats offering this service, providing tourists with an experience like no other. If you're interested in sailing the canal, then take a look at Panama Canal Tours, where you can choose a cruise or another type of tour.

About the Author Hana LaRock is a freelance content writer from New York, currently living in Mexico. She has spent the last five years traveling the world and living abroad and has lived in South Korea and Israel. Hana has been writing about her travel experiences for several years and has been published in print magazines like Travel Ideas and Ensemble Vacations, as well as websites such as Tour Amigo, The Culture Trip, REI, and Orbitz. Hana has been to nearly 30 countries and counting. Through her experiences, she has learned to navigate the challenges that can come with visiting other countries and cultures. To learn more, visit her website at www.hanalarockwriting.com.