I went to Las Vegas on Tuesday, and while driving in from the airport, I saw a big neon billboard with a photograph of a young man. It read, “Wanted: Las Vegas Strip Shooting Suspect. Ammar Harris. Call 911 if you see him.” Harris is the 26-year-old ex-convict suspected of spraying gunfire into a Maserati on the Strip last week, resulting in a crash that killed three people.

Then, on Wednesday, the Las Vegas Review-Journal published a remarkable story about Harris, based in part on the last two years of his Twitter feed. Harris was a pimp, and proud of it, who posted photographs of stacks of bills—he claimed to be a millionaire—and guns, bragged about his pimping, brutalized women and relished his status as a criminal. He and his girlfriend, who was allegedly in the car during the shooting, are both being sought. But they have so far managed to elude capture.

Here is today’s grim sampling of gun violence.

A woman who picked up her two young grandsons from child care and was supposed to bring them home so one of them could open his birthday presents instead drove them to a neighboring town and shot and killed them and herself. The bodies of 47-year-old Debra Denison and her grandsons, 2-year-old Alton Perry and 6-month-old Ashton Perry, were found Tuesday night in a parked car in Preston, Conn. Family members said Denison, the boys’ maternal grandmother, had a history of mental health problems.

—Journal Gazette

A mother of four was shot dead Tuesday morning outside her West Philadelphia home in front of her young son. Jennifer Fitzpatrick, 37, was the victim of domestic violence perpetrated by a “jilted ex-boyfriend,” according to her father. “It’s like a nightmare to me,” he said, adding that he had also lost a son to gun violence. Police had a man in custody.

—Philly.com

A student at Coastal Carolina University in Conway, S.C., died after a shooting near the campus Wednesday. Anthony Darnell Liddell, 19, a sophomore from Bennettsville, died after the shooting around 7:20 p.m. Tuesday at a residence hall. The search continued Wednesday for the shooter.

—USA Today

A 17-year-old girl shot herself outside of Grady High School in Atlanta Wednesday morning, prompting the school to go into lockdown mode. The student entered the school clinic with what appeared to be a self-inflicted gunshot wound to her left thigh, and was transported to the hospital in stable condition. Atlanta Public Schools Superintendent Erroll Davis says the student was shot in the courtyard between the gym and the main building. It’s not clear whether the shooting was accidental or intentional.

—Atlanta Blackstar

Two people are injured and a suspect is in custody following a shooting in the parking lot of a Mormon temple in Columbus, Ohio, Tuesday afternoon. The shooting took place at about 4:45 p.m. Columbus police said they have a male suspect in custody. Both victims were hospitalized and are in critical but stable condition.

—NBC News

Two people were shot at a Stockton, Calif., home on Wednesday. Dwight Smith, 25, opened fire at a home just before 10 a.m. Neighbors believe the man was a tenant and shot his landlord and a second victim. The victims were able to speak with officers before being taken to an area hospital. The gunman is at large.

—KCRA

Jeffrey A. Hulett, 37, is suspected of luring a co-worker out of a Kansas City restaurant last night and shooting him in the back of the head, killing him. Police say Hulett went to the diner Tuesday night for the “sole purpose” of killing Lionel S. Hernandez, 47, a cook, whom Hulett said had “crossed the line.” Hulett did not reveal the specific reasons he was angry with Hernandez.

—Kansas City Star

Authorities say a taxi driver shot an Alexandria, Va., police officer Wednesday during a traffic stop for a minor offense. The officer suffered life threatening injuries and is in critical condition. The driver of the taxi was apprehended after a chase.

—WTVR

Grand Junction, Colo., police are investigating after a dispute between a man and his son left the son dead of gunshot wounds. Police say no one has been arrested and they are not looking for any suspects.

—9News

According to Slate’s gun-death tracker, an estimated 2,332 people have died as a result of gun violence in America since the Newtown massacre on December 14, 2012.