A T-shirt company in Upstate New York is getting a boost thanks to the new "Spider-Man" movie.

Tom Holland wears a number of geeky shirts as Peter Parker in "Spider-Man: Homecoming," including one made by Crazy Dog T-Shirts in Rochester. It mocks math problems by showing a triangle with the instruction to "find X"; X is on the hypotenuse, circled in red with an arrow saying "I found it."

"We were trying to come up with funny takes for back to school," Crazy Dog T-Shirts CEO Bill Kingston told the Democrat & Chronicle.

Kingston said it was chosen by a costume designer for the Marvel film two years ago to fit the web-slinging hero's personality as a high school student. Since the "Spider-Man" reboot was released in theaters three weeks ago, Crazy Dog is seeing increased demand for the shirt through its website, crazydogtshirts.com, and on Amazon.

Costume designer Louise Frogley tells Racked that the shirts are meant to show Parker's intelligence and youth. The idea came from director Jon Watts, though she searched the internet herself for the right ones, and then sanded some down or washed them to appear more worn.

Other dorky shirts from SnorgTees and NeatoShop, worn by Holland in the movie, include jokes about science ("the physics is theoretical but the fun is real"), telekinesis ("if you believe in telekinesis, please raise my hand") and atoms ("I lost an electron" -- "are you positive?"). The latter also appeared in a pajama top worn by Pepper Potts (Gwyneth Paltrow) in "Iron Man 3"; Robert Downey Jr. plays a prominent role in the new Spider-Man film as Iron Man and Tony Stark.

"We just wanted them because they were silly," Frogley told Racked. "On the film it's like a throwaway thing, [but] actually it was very much thought about."

Kingston, whose company employs 40 people, told the D&C that he's not surprised.

"Our whole motto is we have that T-shirt that captures your personality perfectly," he told the newspaper.

Here it is-the t-shirt only a Math Geek could love worn by Peter Parker in @SpiderManMovie by @CrazyDogTShirts #ROC Hypotenuse anyone? pic.twitter.com/gwEuYs7UKc -- Mary Chao (@marychaostyle) July 26, 2017

While watching Spiderman: Homecoming, @Silvinonono noticed that Peter Parker and I have the same shirt [?] [?] [?] pic.twitter.com/llueKU78rv -- Osmara Vyassali (@Osmaralalala) July 10, 2017