Gary Kubiak has agreed to become the head coach of the Denver Broncos, the team announced Monday.

Editor's Picks How does Kubiak's hire affect Manning'€™s return? Incoming Broncos coach Gary Kubiak has always run a version of the West Coast offense. Peyton Manning comes with his own offense. Can the two work together? Jeff Legwold asks.

Hensley: Kubiak jumped at dream job Everyone in Baltimore should be ticked off at Gary Kubiak for breaking his word to the Ravens, right? Not really.

Five quick thoughts on the Kubiak hiring The Denver Broncos will hire Gary Kubiak as coach. Jeff Legwold delivers some quick takes on what it means. 2 Related

Kubiak's deal is for four years, according to multiple reports. He spent the past season as the Baltimore Ravens' offensive coordinator.

Before joining the Ravens' staff, Kubiak had served as head coach of the Houston Texans. The Broncos will introduce him at a Tuesday afternoon news conference.

"Gary Kubiak has established a track record of leadership, success and high character during his 30 seasons in the NFL," Broncos general manager John Elway said in a statement Monday. "While there is no question he is a Bronco, what Gary has learned from his other opportunities around the league -- especially in his eight seasons as a head coach -- will tremendously benefit our organization.

"Having coached on three Super Bowl champions and 11 playoff teams, Gary knows what it will take to deliver another world championship to Broncos fans. Coach Kubiak is all about winning and doing things the right way, which are values that have always been most important to the Broncos and owner Pat Bowlen."

Kubiak had said after the Ravens' loss to the New England Patriots last week in the divisional round of the playoffs that he was staying in Baltimore, but he had a change of heart when the Broncos job became available.

Kubiak served as backup quarterback to Elway before becoming a part of the team's coaching staff after his retirement.

Ravens quarterbacks coach Rick Dennison and tight ends coach Brian Pariani will be following Kubiak to Denver, sources told ESPN.com's Jamison Hensley.

Kubiak replaces John Fox, who parted ways with Denver following the team's divisional round playoff loss to the Indianapolis Colts a week ago. Fox has since been hired as head coach of the Chicago Bears.

The Broncos' hiring of Kubiak leaves the Atlanta Falcons as the lone team without a head coach.

Kubiak's son weighed in via Twitter on Sunday: