This 1970 Datsun Bluebird SSS Coupe (chassis P510-244933) is the JDM right-hand-drive sibling of the common 510 model, and is notable for its swept c-pillars, SSS exterior trim, and wide rear lamp assembly with sequential turn signals. It was purchased by the current SoCal owner directly from Japan, where it was built by a American serviceman whose attention to detail and quality of work is detailed in the 65 page build thread below. The car has been modified with a SR20 turbo engine and the seller calls the car “flawless, needing nothing, and the cleanest Bluebird anywhere.” It has never been offered publicly for sale before now, and is available in Escondido, California for $40k.

Check out the full build thread here on 510realm.com. Exterior details like proper chrome fender mirrors, an NOS JDM grille, and an NOS replacement rear bumper help set this Bluebird apart from many other Datsun builds. Front brakes are from an R32 Skyline and rear brakes are Wilwood units. Troy Ermish coil-overs and TTTuning adjustable front TC rods highlight the suspension build, and set the car down nicely over 16″ Rays TE37 wheels fastened with titanium lug nuts.

The dash features the stock dash with the factory radio and clean, fully functioning switch-work. One aftermarket gauge is hidden beneath the dash and the steering wheel is a yellow-stitched Personal unit. An electric power steering system has been added, as seen here in the gallery. Custom made GTS carbon fiber low-back retro bucket seats look very cool, and Sparco 4-point belts were added for both driver and passenger.

The Nissan SR20 engine has 45K miles and is all stock apart from a Greddy intake, putting 200 horsepower to the wheels. The engine bay is very clean, and details like the NOS wiper motor and TSR radiator give it a high quality look. The 5-speed transmission feeds power through a modified transmission tunnel to a R200 limited-slip differential. A 5-lug conversion and Porsche 930 CV joints have further fortified the driveline.

Click here to email the seller directly if you are interested.

Check out the additional photos here in the Flickr album and slide-show below.