Colorado Springs, Colo. --- San José State University's 18-game regular season Mountain West schedule was revealed by the conference on Tuesday. The Spartans open up conference play on the road at Nevada on December 28, and return to The Event Center to face Colorado State in the conference home-opener on January 4.



"We are excited to release our 2016-17 conference schedule as the Mountain West will once again become one of the toughest conferences in America," said Spartans' head coach Dave Wojcik. "We look forward to the challenges ahead, and expect to continue improving as we build our program into one of the most formidable in the league."



The schedule format for the 11-member league includes eight home-and-home series and two one-time opponents. In 2016-17, San José State will play Utah State once at home (2/22) and New Mexico once on the road (2/4).

The Spartans' oldest rival Fresno State, visits San Jose on January 7 before the team heads out for two on the road at San Diego State (1/11) and at Air Force (1/14). The Aztecs and Spartans collide again inside The Event Center on February 8.

Last season the Spartans and Runnin' Rebels of UNLV only met once, but this year the two teams will square off in San Jose on January 28 and in Las Vegas on February 11.

Boise State, which fell at the hands of San José State in last year's regular-season finale, comes back to The Event Center on January 21. It will be the second of back-to-back home games for SJSU as it welcomes Wyoming on January 18.

SJSU will play at Wyoming for the second year in a row on their senior night, which marks the regular-season finale for both teams on March 4. Three days before that, San José State will honor its seniors Isaac Thornton and Gary Williams, Jr. , in the home finale versus the Nevada Wolf Pack.

Today's release represents the first phase in the 2016-17 men's basketball schedule process. The Mountain West's national television partners CBS Sports Network and ESPN, and regional partner ROOT SPORTS, will go through a selection process lasting through the middle of August. The selections may shift Wednesday games to Tuesday and Saturday games to Sunday.

An announcement about television selections will be made on SJSUSpartans.com at the appropriate time.

Additionally, the Conference announced the format for the 2017 MW Men's Basketball Championship. The tournament begins with first-round games on Wednesday March 8 and the championship game is set for 3:00 p.m. PT on Saturday, March 11.