Maharashtra government’s decision to require only 51% of the members to give their approval for a housing society to be redeveloped is set to boost the housing redevelopment sector in the city. Earlier, 70% approval was needed.

Chief minister Devendra Fadnavis recently took this decision as the Maharashtra Co-operative Housing Federation was making this demand for many years.

There are many old buildings in Pune, Mumbai, Thane, Nashik and other cities. The buildings, which are more than 30-years-old are being mainly considered for redevelopment. Though most members from these housing societies are in favour of redevelopment, often it becomes difficult to pass the proposal when even a few are opposed to it.

Land is at a premium in terms of availability in the metro cities. Naturally, the future of real estate future is redevelopment. Most factors, like citizens not wanting to shift to other parts of the city, lend to much support for redevelopment.

The benefits of redevelopment are many, including new amenities, better construction and additional facilities like elevators and fire systems.

Maharashtra Co-operative Housing Federation director and Pune District Co-operative Housing Societies president, Suhas Pathwardhan, welcomed chief minister Fadnavis’ decision.

Pathwardhan said, “Many people living in housing societies are willing to do redevelopment as there are many benefits. One thing usually they get is a little more area in the new building, plus new amenities and other facilities linked with technology.”

There still are some members who make it an ego issue and oppose the redevelopment of a society, according to Pathwardhan. Sometimes they move court to oppose the resolution.

However, this latest government decision to bring the number of members needed to clear a redevelopment plan down to 51% from 70% is likely to work in favour of those supporting redevelopment.

Pune District Co-operative Housing Society secretary, Manisha Koshti, said that it is a good decision and housing society will get the benefits of redevelopment.

Gokhale Builders managing director Vishal Gokhale said that redevelopment is the future and this decision will help to boost the housing sector.

Why is redevelopment beneficial?

- Citizens get a new home at the same place they were residing in

- Once a housing society is 30-years-old, it is mandatory to do a structural audit of each building. Old housing societies, therefore, prefer to do a redevelopment

- Citizens get a new drainage system, water system along with other amenities like elevators and fire safety system

- There are many old wadas and old buildings in Pune, Mumbai, Thane and Nashik city which will benefit through this decision

First Published: Aug 08, 2017 12:09 IST