Twenty-four police stations in New Zealand did not solve a single burglary in 2015.

Information released by New Zealand police showed only 9.3 per cent of all burglaries in New Zealand in 2015 were solved.

Out of the 24 police stations that did not solve any burglaries, Bulls and Russell had the worst resolution rate, with all 32 burglaries that occurred in each of the areas unsolved in 2015.

The station that solved the most burglaries was Pleasant Point, with 50 per cent of the burglaries in the area solved.

READ MORE:

*Meth discovered in baby carriers

*Napier home invasion

*Ram raid on The Warehouse

Waikouaiti solved 44 per cent of the burglaries that occurred.

Manawatu area prevention manager Inspector David White said for the Bulls area only 15 of the burglaries were in the township, the rest were rural burglaries.

Of the 32 reported, eight were for the theft of motorcycles from rural properties and another eight saw nothing taken.

"Without diminishing the sense of loss for any theft, the remainder included petrol from farm tanks, a rabbit, and chainsaws from sheds."

The rabbit stolen had been reported earlier by Stuff, and was returned home to the person it was stolen from after being found in a bush near the property.

White said there were two officers who worked in the Bulls area.

"However, our officers do work across areas and stations where necessary."

In 2015, 2072 preventative activities were recorded in the Bulls police area.

"These activities include checking people on court bail, stopping cars, hotel visits, foot patrols, and road checkpoints."

White said there were several reasons burglaries may go unsolved.

"Police follow up on all reports made to us, however, if police have exhausted all evidence, lines of inquiries, potential suspects, witnesses or other information available, it is difficult for staff to investigate these."

Any victimisation was of concern to police but White said with the burglaries averaging out in Bulls to around 2.5 reported per month, it was unlikely extra officers were needed.

Rangitikei District Mayor Andy Watson said he would be talking to the regional commander after hearing the figures for Bulls burglary rate.

"I do find it a bit concerning, I'll have to talk with the regional commander and see if it's resources or if there's any variables we can look [into]."

In Taihape, Bulls, Marton and Hunterville security cameras had been installed throughout the town.

"I'll have a chat to police about whether there's a crime prevention method we can look at, [maybe] getting information out especially to the rural people about looking after their security."

In the Manawatu area Kimbolton and Pongaroa also had a 0 per cent resolution rate for burglaries.

Kimbolton had 11 burglaries and Pongaroa 5.



