With the transfer window reaching its conclusion we take a collective look at our summer signings.

Fresh from his success with Brazil at the Confederations Cup, Paulinho was our first arrival in early July with Belgium international Nacer Chadli, Valencia captain Roberto Soldado and France international Etienne Capoue also arriving before the season got underway.

Friday saw a further three additions to our ranks in the form of young internationals Erik Lamela, Christian Eriksen and Vlad Chiriches.

“We have been extremely active, conducted our business early and have made some excellent acquisitions in the market to make us stronger this season as well as giving ourselves greater options across the squad,” reflected our Head Coach.

“We have added tremendous individual quality and this can only help us to come together as a team even quicker. There is huge belief in what we are looking to create here for the future.

"Paulinho is a player we had been chasing for quite some time. He is extremely gifted and versatile, having originally played as a defensive midfielder and now plays a more offensive role. He has an eye for goal and works hard throughout the 90 minutes, which is decisive in the Premier League.

"We are looking for Nacer Chadli to play mainly on the wings to give us width but he has also played the creative role behind the striker in the past as well as up front for Belgium so to have someone of his versatility is important to the squad. He had a good season in Holland last year and contributed a lot of goals.

"Roberto Soldado's career speaks for itself. He is an outstanding striker with so much Champions League and international experience. He is a goal scorer and has certainly lived up to that reputation in the early stages of this season already. He can only get better as he continues to adapt to his new teammates and the league.

"Etienne Capoue has grown rapidly during his time with Toulouse, he is a wonderful footballer that can play in a variety of positions and will strengthen our midfield following on from Tom Huddlestone's departure. He is a player of international quality and has great all-round ability.

“Erik Lamela is a young player of great dimensions. He is incredibly highly regarded in his homeland and has been on the radar of Europe's biggest clubs in the past so we are delighted to have him here. He has pace, is a huge threat with the ball at his feet and has a good goalscoring record from his time in Serie A as well as providing a regular supply for his teammates. I am sure he will be able to improve even further in the Premier League.

"It was always our intention to strengthen in defence following Steven Caulker's departure. I feel it is important to have four central defenders and Vlad is a great addition in this area. He is solid defensively, a leader and has the quality to bring the ball out from the back, to drive forward and has great build-up play - something that we insist upon with all our centre-backs.

"Christian Eriksen is a wonderfully creative player, who is accustomed to playing at a high level in Europe. He showed at Ajax all of his qualities and ability, particularly in terms of flair and creativity with the number of chances and assists he provided to his teammates. He has great ability to pick a pass and is an excellent link-up player.

"We can look ahead to the season with a real sense of excitement. These new additions will join with our already strong group of talented players and further enhance the quality and spirit that exists within this squad.”

Steven Caulker, Clint Dempsey, Tom Huddlestone, Scott Parker, Gareth Bale, Massimo Luongo and Nathan Byrne all departed the Club over the summer months and we wish them all the best for the future.