In this year's 'Initial Quality Study' run by US market research institute J.D. Power, the Porsche 911 is rated highest among all nameplates in the overall study and takes top position in its segment for the fifth time in succession. The company's main production plant in Stuttgart-Zuffenhausen also comes first in the factory rankings in the Europe/Africa region. In its segment, the newest member of the model range, the Porsche Macan, also takes top spot. The survey was completed by over 80.000 private individuals, and included 245 models from 33 manufacturers.

"Thrilled customers are what drives us on," says Oliver Blume, Chairman of the Executive Board of Porsche AG. "All of our staff work with great dedication every day to provide our customers with the very special Porsche quality. It is the result of intensive work that is characterised at every stage and in every area by a love for the perfect sports car."

The Macan came top in the 'Premium Sporty SUV' segment

With its top place once again, the iconic 911 sports car takes first spot for the fifth time in a row in the 'Midsize Premium Sporty Car' segment. The US customers have thus been attesting since 2012 that this classic vehicle from Stuttgart-Zuffenhausen provides the highest quality. In addition, the Porsche 911 is the model with the least number of complaints of all vehicles taking part in the study. The Macan came top in the 'Compact Premium SUV' segment, thus repeating its success of last year, when it took part for the first time.

Based on the results of their study, the US market researchers also produced an assessment of the production sites. In the factory evaluation for Europe/Africa, the main Porsche plant in Stuttgart-Zuffenhausen, where as well as the 911 the Boxster and Cayman models are also produced, was ranked in first place.

Porsche judges its sports cars by data and KPIs

"Every Porsche is proof of our comprehensive quality standard," says Albrecht Reimold, Executive Board Member for Production and Logistics at Porsche AG. "Sportspeople judge themselves in competition by data and KPIs - and that's exactly how Porsche builds its sports cars too. Our employees are aware of this challenge, which is a joy and an incentive at the same."

About the study

In the 'Initial Quality Study' J.D. Power annually surveys new car customers 90 days after their vehicle has been supplied. In this year's 30th running of the study US new car drivers were surveyed between February and May 2016 on 233 criteria from a range of different categories. Properties and features that the owners are asked about include 'Driving experience' and 'Engine and transmission'.

More about the study: jdpower.com.

Consumption data

Boxster: Combined fuel consumption: 8,4 – 7,9 l/100 km; CO2 emissions: 195 – 183 g/km

Cayman: Combined fuel consumption: 8,4 – 7,9 l/100 km; CO2 emissions: 195 – 183 g/km