TOPEKA - When former State Sen. Ruth Teichman, Stafford, was asked to join fellow Republican leaders in an endorsement of Democratic House Minority Leader Paul Davis for governor, she said yes - "right away," she added.



"I am concerned with the direction this state is going," said Teichman Tuesday. She and 103 current and former Republican officeholders from across Kansas are throwing their support to Davis in his coming race against Republican Gov. Sam Brownback.



"Historic" and "unprecedented" were adjectives the Paul Davis-Jill Docking campaign ticket used in the press release Monday to tout the announcement to occur Tuesday morning in Topeka. The campaign said multiple endorsements would be made, but kept a tight lid on the names.



At 11 a.m. Tuesday, about 40 people entered the ballroom in the Ramada Hotel and Convention Center in downtown Topeka, filling a riser that included Davis and Docking. Former State Senate President Steve Morris, Hugoton, and former State Sen. Fred Kerr, Pratt, were there, along with State Insurance Commissioner Sandy Praeger.



Speakers roasted Brownback's tax code changes and handling of the state budget. They repeatedly chastised Brownback over school funding.



Brownback has exhibited a "divisive" and "hyper-partisan brand of leadership," said former State Sen. Wint Winter Jr., Lawrence.



Supporting a Democrat for governor "is a big step for every one of us," said former State Senate President Dick Bond, Overland Park, a life-long Republican.



The Republicans indicated they won't change parties - they'll just work for the victory of Davis-Docking in the November general election.



Docking said she was conducting door-to-door campaigning Monday, and that's something "all these folks know how to do."



"They're all willing to help us," Docking said.



Among the 104 names on the list of Republicans for Kansas Values were, from this region: Reno County Commissioner Brad Dillon and former Newton Mayor Marge Roberson, and former state legislators Bob Frey, Liberal, and Fred Gatlin, Atwood. Ted and Sue Ice, Newton, former delegates to Republican National Conventions, were on the list, as well as former State Rep. Ellen Samuelson, Hesston, and former State Board of Education member Sonny Rundell, Syracuse.



"Absolutely," Morris said, when asked later if he will remain a Republican. "We're also loyal Kansans. To us the future of this state comes first," he said.



"This is all about policy," said Kerr, criticizing the Brownback income tax cuts as "distorted" in favor of the wealthy.



As for the potential impact on the Kansas Republican Party, Kerr said, "Ultimately I hope the Kansas Republican Party comes back to the mainstream."



Read more in the Wednesday edition of The News.