FORGET football and leave the cricket bat and ball at home, because the frisbee is making a comeback.

The favourite airborne toy of the 1970s is not only making a triumphant return but is soaring to new heights in Wyong shire which became home to the Coast’s first disc golf course on Friday.

Wyong Council has installed nine chain wire baskets at Koala Park at Lake Munmorah to create a disc golf course which was ­officially opened last week.

media_camera Emilie Cameron, four time Australian champion, plays a game of Koala Park Disc Golf, at Doyalson. Picture:Peter Clark

The council’s parks and sports fields section manager Keith Ollier said disc golf was just like traditional golf but instead of hitting a tiny ball, you throw a flying disc, or frisbee.

“We heard about this sport and thought we have to bring it to Wyong Shire,” Mr Ollier said.

“After some research, Koala Park proved to be the perfect spot and we worked with professional Australian disc golfers to make sure our course is one of the best.

“This new recreation activity is free and is set up for those keen to take up a new sport or families and friends looking for something different to do on a weekend.

“Koala Park already boasts a sports field, tennis courts and full amenities including a kitchen and this new course will certainly increase the range of recreation options available.”

There are already more than 700 registered disc golf players in Australia and interest in the sport is growing each year.

Australian Disc Golf president Neil Roberts said Disc Golf was a simple sport anyone can play.

“Disc Golf can be played as a competitive sport or as a social pastime,” Mr Roberts said.

“It shares the same joys and frustrations of traditional golf, whether it’s sinking a long putt or hitting a tree halfway down the fairway. I’ve been competing since 2010 and it can be quite technical because it’s more than just throwing a frisbee.

“Just like ball golf, there are putters, mid-range discs and drivers as well as ones that throw to the left, right or roll along the ground.

“I was happy to work with the council to develop a course.

“I’m hoping to bring one of the Women’s Global events to Koala Park this May.”

Find out more on the Koala Park course at wyong.nsw.gov.au/discgolf