MINNEAPOLIS, Minn. — The brother of Josh Powell has committed suicide in Minneapolis, according to reports.

The Minneapolis Police Department confirmed Michael Powell committed suicide at 2 p.m. Monday by jumping off a parking ramp.

Police are not sure at this time what led to Powell's suicide.

Powell's brother, Josh Powell, killed himself and his two sons in an explosion in Feb. 2012.

Days before the explosion, Powell had been denied custody of the children and ordered to undergo a psychosexual evaluation. He had long been suspected in the disappearance of his wife, Susan Cox Powell, who is still missing.

Timeline in Susan Cox Powell case: A more detailed timeline of events can be found here. 2009

Dec. 6 - The last time anyone saw Susan Powell

Dec. 7 - The day Susan Powell was reported missing

Dec. 9 - Police call disappearance of Susan Powell "suspicious"

Dec. 16 - Josh Powell named person of interest 2010

Jan. 9 - Josh Powell packs up West Valley City house

Dec. 6 - Josh Powell and his father, Steve, assert that Susan Powell ran away with missing Utah man Steven Koecher, who disappeared in Nevada in December 2009. 2011

Aug. 25 - West Valley Police serve warrant to Steve and Josh Powell

Sept. - Steven Powell faces charges of voyeurism and possessing child porn Sept. 23 - Susan's parents file for custody of Powell sons

Sept. 27 - Cox family gains temporary custody 2012

Feb 1. - Judge denies Josh Powell custody

Feb. 5 - Josh allegedly sends message to lawyer saying goodbye, home explodes shortly after

Michael Powell had launched — and subsequently removed — a website in Jan. 2012 claiming investigators had not done a thorough job of screening other family members, and that the Powell children were in danger while in the care of the Cox family.

The site included links to documents and news stories about the case and claimed police had bungled the investigation into Susan's disappearance.

Kiirsi Hellewell, a good friend of Susan Powell's, on Tuesday expressed her sorrow for what had happened.

"I was very sad, first of all that somebody would just throw their life away, and second of all, I feel sorry for Jennifer (Graves, Powell's sister) and her family, and the rest of her siblings," she said.

She said she also felt a sense of disappointment, though.

"There was another part of me that just thought, 'Oh great, now there's one more chance we might have had to find Susan, and maybe he knew something, and now it's gone,' " she said.

Stay with ksl.com, KSL TV and KSL Newsradio for more information as it becomes available.

×

Related Stories