Win tickets to see Save Ferris and Stacked Like Pancakes on Thursday October 26th, 2017 at Music Box!

Ticket Price: $25 advanced & day of show

Parking: Street parking and paid lot parking available.

TableReservations / VIP: vip@musicboxsd.com / (619) 836-1847

Box Office Hours Monday – Friday 11:00am – 4:00pm

Enter your email below for a chance to win! Contest ends October 23rd, 2017. Winner will be notified by email.

WIN TICKETS TO SAVE FERRIS WIN TICKETS TO SAVE FERRIS 0 Your Entries 35 Total Entries Ended Days Left Win tickets to see Save Ferris and Stacked Like Pancakes on Thursday October 26th, 2017 at Music Box! Contest ends October 23rd, 2017. Winner will be notified by email. This contest expired.

Good luck!

—

Save Ferris

WHERE IT ALL BEGAN

Save Ferris is a ska-punk band formed in Orange County, California circa 1995. Their name is a reference to the 1986 film Ferris Bueller’s Day Off.

Lead by the inimitable front-woman Monique Powell, the band enjoyed mainstream success in the late 1990s with radio hits, constant touring and appearances on a variety of television shows and movies.

The band released their debut EP “Introducing Save Ferris” on Powell’s own Starpool Records, in 1996. They ended up selling close to 20,000 copies of their EP out of the trunks of their cars, thanks to loyal fans and huge support from Orange County independent record shops. That same year, Powell provided vocals on the Reel Big Fish song “She Has A Girlfriend Now” on their album “Turn the Radio Off” (Mojo).

As favorites of KROQ radio’s legendary Rodney on the Rock, Save Ferris became a regular presence on LA’s KROQ radio.

Later that year, the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences gave the band a Grammy showcase award for best unsigned band, earning them a recording contract with Epic Records (SONY).

The band released their debut full-length album for Epic in 1997. “It Means Everything” featured several re-recorded tracks from the EP, several new songs, a cover of Dexy’s Midnight Runners’ “Come on Eileen,” which the band released as their first official single, and what was to become their most successful single.

With two singles in the Billboard top 100 and full rotation on alternative radio all over the world, “It Means Everything” went platinum internationally.

In April 1998, Save Ferris made made their seminal on-screen appearance in the cult classic teen film, “10 Things I Hate About You”.

After a thunderously successful main stage tour with the Vans Warped Tour, the band began writing their follow-up to “It Means Everything”, the appropriately-titled “Modified”. Released in October 1999, the album saw the band mix their ska-punk roots with pop-punk stylings.

After almost fifteen years, Save Ferris will make their long awaited return to the music scene in 2017. Following a successful PledgeMusic campaign, the band’s new EP – Checkered Past – will be released on February 10th. The EP, produced by Oingo Boingo bassist John Avila, embraces Monique’s ska and dub roots and also features a guest appearance by Neville Staple of the Specials on the first single “New Sound.”

February 10th also marks the start of the band’s first full tour of the United States. The tour will take the band’s energetic show around the country starting in Santa Barbara and finishing at the new House of Blues in Anaheim, California with support from Vista Kicks on the West Coast and Baby Baby on the East Coast.

“Since this incarnation of Save Ferris first played together, the band and I have been working on new music, arranging schedules and selectively playing local shows to get ready for a tour. I have had to tell our fans to ‘be patient, I promise it’ll happen’ for too long now! But now here we are. I can’t believe we’ve made it this far….and now you get to see us in a town near you. For the first time in 15 years, Save Ferris is coming to get you! Are you ready?”

– Monique Powell

Stacked Like Pancakes

Reinvigorating the sounds of classic ska, Stacked Like Pancakes (SLP) piles on boisterous horns and punk rock attitude to create high energy music synthesizing the vibes of Reel Big Fish, twenty one pilots, Foo Fighters, and an untraceable amount of other artists and genres. Since 2007, SLP has shared the stage with national and international acts, toured on the Vans Warped Tour, headlined their own self-booked tours, and in December 2015 released their latest crowd-funded 15-track monster-album THIS IS US.

The token with this group is their live performance. Concert venues and music patrons alike should be prepared for the stage to shake, the crowd to be wild and unpredictable, and the show to be a deliberate fusion of spontaneity and precision. Their community fan base – the #PancakeNation – is hungry for their band to grow. Stacked Like Pancakes epitomizes a tough DIY band despite a meaningless band name, and are rightfully on the rise to claim an international stage of their own.