An outbreak of suspicious clown sightings reported across the country has spread to New Jersey, where the state police are warning — but not scaring — people.

Authorities say there have been at least four reports of clown sightings in New Jersey, just days after similar reports came out of Pennsylvania.

The state police took a lighthearted approach to the reports, providing tips to children who could be frightened easily and saying: "We know that there are a lot of good, hard-working clowns right here in Jersey."

"Heck, you might even work with one or two [wink]," state police said on Facebook. "Of course, it's probably their part-time job, unless you all work for a circus."

N.J.com reported four incidents — all of which occurred in Phillipsburg, just over the Delaware River from Pennsylvania — prompting police to attempt to reassure fearful residents.

"We don't need a society living in fear," Phillipsburg police Capt. Robert Stettner told NJ.com.

The publication reported the following incidents:

Three clowns allegedly came out of the woods and chased a child at 8 p.m. Sunday in Walters Park.

Someone was seen dressed as a clown on Hudson Street at about 5 p.m. on Monday.

A jester holding some kind of sword reportedly ran after a child on Shafer Avenue at 7:45 p.m. on Monday.

A dark-colored truck was seen driving down Mercer Street with multiple clowns hanging out the window at about 9:30 p.m. on Monday.

In Pennsylvania last week, state police in Huntington County filed a report stating a clown sighting is currently under investigation there. The incident involved "unknown actor(s) dressed as a clown." No threats were made, police said, and no description of the clown was provided.

Nonetheless, Pennsylvania State Police warned residents, "if you observe an individual dressed as a clown on your property or along county roadways you are encouraged to call State Police."

Police in New Jersey provided the following tips:

Talk to your kids.

Tell them who they can expect to come and get them in an emergency (family member or close friend).

When walking to school, there is strength in numbers — walk in a group.

Never get into a stranger's car.

Keep a safe distance from strangers asking for directions or help.

Tell your kids to yell, scream and kick if grabbed by a stranger.

Look around, stop looking for Pokemon — be aware of your surroundings.

If a stranger claims to be a cop but is not in uniform, kids should find a trusted adult.

The New Jersey reports are among a broader rash of odd clown sightings nationwide.

Reports of clowns trying to lure children into the woods were recently under investigation in Greenville, South Carolina. Other sightings have been reported in Georgia, Alabama, Kentucky and Maryland. However, authorities believe many of these reports are unsubstantiated, the Washington Post says.

Photo: N.J State Police