Chapter 1

The grounds of Beacon were transformed in the half-light; the absence of bustling students combined with the faint glow of lampposts along the main pathways made the unlit areas of Beacon even darker and more foreboding by comparison. Yang often walked back the dorms alone after her private sparring sessions but she could never get used to Beacon as it was in the late evening.

As the last one using the gym for the night, she had the responsibility of locking up. Not many students used the gym as late as Yang did who appreciated the privacy it offered, and Yang was always the last one to leave. The reasons for this were twofold; the first being that her days were so busy most of the time between endless classes, hanging out with her friend, team exercises, etc. During the day she rarely had a moment to herself.

The other reason was a lot more personal and currently bulging awkwardly in her shorts.

"Ah, shit," Yang bit her lip, considering her options. She peeked out of the main gym doors, and confident that nobody was nearby she closed them and turned back toward the locker rooms she had just left.

The reason was that working out as she did; sparring against a dummy or a solid punching bag got Yang worked up and excited and when she got into that state then it would become very obvious to any onlookers that Yang was no ordinary girl.

Yang entered the unisex locker room and flipped the light switch revealing empty shower stalls, benches and lockers lining the wall. She pushed the door shut behind her and put her duffel bag against it. Yang felt a hot rush that only worsened the awkward straining against her gym shorts and the anticipation was becoming unbearable.

"A few minutes," Yang told herself; her voice unusually quiet. "Just a few minutes."

She hooked her thumbs under the hem of her T-shirt and pulled it over her head exposing her breasts just barely concealed behind her straining E-cup bra. She fingered the fabric for a moment but decided to leave it on. Fitting those puppies back in was just too much effort to put up with. She kicked her trainers off, followed quickly by her black socks and then there was only one thing left.

She slowly inched her shorts off of her ample hips, and down her long legs, almost teasingly though it was only herself she was frustrating. The thin black panties she wore underneath were already drenched with the copious amount of precum flowing steadily from her dick and so they were discarded as well to fall next to the shorts. Yang sat across the corner of the bench closest to the door, legs spread wide and erect dick bobbing up and down hypnotically to match her breathing.

Yang managed to pull her eyes up and focused on a full-length mirror on the wall opposite her. Her creamy skin was almost entirely open to view; her golden locks of hair messily falling over her shoulders and her black bra were the only obstructions. Her violet eyes matched her reflections and she felt a hot rush of embarrassment as though she had locked eyes with a naked stranger. The heat intensified the needy yearning in her loins and at last she reached with both hands for the object of her frustration.

Her dick was 10 inches long and thick, a perfect male specimen on a perfect female body, she reflected vainly. She had been with boys before plenty of times though they had never gotten as far as discovering her secret. None of them could compare to her own which made her feel oddly happy and disquietly disappointed too. If she was better than everyone around her, then how could she be truly satisfied?

She stroked herself slowly; one hand lightly wrapped around the shaft and the other creeping past her balls to reach her wet pussy. Instead of a clit she had an entire set of male genitals; but the rest of her body was anatomically correct. The combined physical stimulation of both her male and female halves was a surefire way to reach overwhelming pleasure. The precum that had been building up steadily since she started her workout was now being used as a lubricant to enhance her masturbation. That was she doing it in a relatively public place like the locker room where her classmates would come to excited her incredibly.

Yang moaned softly, and then realizing she was entirely alone, she moaned a little louder.

Her hands moved perceptibly faster; well-lubricated fingers moving from head to shaft in smooth motions while her other hand explored the deeper recesses of her pussy. Her panting breaths were loud and ragged; echoing faintly in the tiled room.

Feeling the pleasure mounting to a peak, Yang's other hand came up from her pussy to focus on her glistening shaft; working it with both hands for those precious last seconds.

Toes curled up, eyes scrunched tightly, Yang came. Hard.

For a brilliant moment Yang's body shuddered and her mind was lost to a blinding pleasure. She was utterly unprepared for the sheet of cloth soaked in chloroform to be slapped over her face. Her eyes snapped open.

A strangers hand reached from behind her and clamped over her own hands, still mindlessly stroking her own cock. Yang, already tired from her earlier workout and doubly so from her intense masturbation was helpless in the strong grip.

Her arms pinned and her head held by the hand pressing the cloth to her face, Yang could only look straight ahead and at the mirror which previously showed only herself. Blackness clouded her vision and for a moment, right before she passed out, Yang could have sworn she was seeing double. Only her doppelganger didn't have golden hair, but black… And then everything went black.

Consciousness came almost as quickly as it had fled her, but Yang was slow to rise; her adrenaline long gone. She pushed herself upright and she could see that had been lying done on a bare mattress, completely naked as even her bra had been taken from her. The room was spartan in terms of decoration. A threadbare chair in one corner, a sink, a flimsy looking cupboard and the mattress she was sitting on was the extent of the furniture. The plaster walls were bare and windowless, the floor was polished wood and a naked bulb dangled from the ceiling. Yang couldn't see a light switch in the room.

Subconsciously crossing her arms and folding her legs to conceal herself, Yang realized another startling fact.

The room didn't have a door.

That didn't make any sense.

"What the fuck is going on," Yang hissed. Plainly she had been kidnapped but it was unthinkable. Kidnapped? In the middle of Beacon? From an empty room?

Just as she was scanning the walls again in case she missed some hidden signs of a concealed door, a flash of crimson light burst into existence in the far corner of the room. Yang threw up her hands to block the light. It dimmed, swirled in place and then seemed to draw back to form a glowing red portal. Through which, stepped the last person Yang expected.

"Mom?" Yang gasped in disbelief. The figure was unmistakably the one who had appeared to her a month ago.

It had been at the end of her fight with that psychopathic mute, Neo, and Yang had woken up to see a helmeted stranger that had saved her life before disappearing into a crimson portal. The same figure stood before her now, unhelmeted and undeniably her mother. The resemblance to Yang's own face was almost perfect except that her mother had an even paler complexion and startlingly red eyes. On top of that, the mass of black hair and red-black armor she wore matched the descriptions Yang had received from her own father about her mother.

"Mom?" Yang repeated hollowly, still unable to believe that the person she had looked for most of her life simply appeared in front of her.

"Yes, Yang," Raven sighed, rolling her eyes slightly. "I'm your mother."

"Are you rescuing me?" Yang wondered, remembering the last time she saw her mother.

Raven's response shocked. She simply laughed. Her own mother was laughing at her while she was sitting there, naked. It was surreal.

"Yang, who do you think brought you here? You're in my house."

"What? What the fuck is going on?"

A dangerous glint came into Raven's red eyes. Without warning the crimson portal behind her slammed shut and vanished. Silently, Raven moved over to the chair and sat down on it, one leg over the air and with her arms folded under her breasts.

"You've got a real potty-mouth on you, don't you, Yang? But I'll be fixing that soon enough. I may have been absent from raising you but that doesn't mean you can speak to me in such tones or use such crude language."

Yang felt so taken aback that she actually felt calmer than when she had woken up. She was uncomfortably aware of how naked she was and kept herself concealed with her hands as best she could. "Why did you bring me here?"

Raven spread her hands to the side and gave a shrug. "Here's the deal honey, Mommy needs a new fucktoy. The last one couldn't keep up with Mommy's needs. Now, I brought you into this world and it's time you paid me back for that. You're going to be my new fucktoy."

Yang was speechless.

Raven waited her out and finally Yang blurted out, "But, you're my mother! That's incest!"

"Doesn't bother me. And the laws have changed in recent years. So long as both participants are above legal age then it's fine."

"I won't do it. You can't make me," Yang was still in a detached shock. She couldn't believe that her own mother that she had been seeking for so long was propositioning her like this.

Raven gave another shrug with a sly smile, "To be honest, your consent isn't needed at this point. You may have noticed you're in a doorless, windowless room. The only way in or out is through me. I'm a generous person though, I'll give you once chance. I want you to hit me as hard as I can. If you're strong enough, I'll let you go. If not, well, then there are no second chances."

Yang gingerly stood up, stepping off the mattress. Gritting her teeth she lowered her hands from breasts and her privates. She couldn't let herself feel embarrassment now.

Raven tapped her cheek, still grinning at Yang. "Just one hit-…"

Yang's eyes flashed red and she stepped forwards, punching Raven in the face with a right hook on the spot she pointed out. It was a punch fueled with her anger, her confusion and her outrage. It was like punching a brick wall. She couldn't believe the strength of her mother's aura to be unaffected in the slightest by a punch like that.

Her mother reached out and grabbed Yang by her arms. She tried to pull away but her mother proved to be as unrelentingly strong as she was tough. She pulled Yang down sharply, bringing her closer and forcing her to her knees. She let go of Yang's arms and simultaneously brought up both of her legs; pinning Yang's arms to her sides with her powerful thighs. With Raven's legs locked together, Yang was held firmly in place.

Grabbing Yang by a handful of her beautiful, golden hair, Raven tilted Yang's head back so she could stare into the violet eyes that gazed up at her angrily. "Now that you've thrown away the chance I so generously gave you, let me make the rules clear. After all, you live under my roof; you live under my rules."

Still holding Yang's head in place with her left hand, Raven slapped Yang with her right for emphasis.

"Rule number one: you will obey me when I give you an order. Toys do not disobey when they are played with, and you. Are. My. Toy."

She slapped her again.

"Rule number two: you will call me Mistress when you address me, like 'Yes, Mistress' and 'No, Mistress' though I can't think of a single reason why you would ever say 'no' to me."

Tears were welling up in the corner of Yang's eyes as Raven slapped her a third time.

"Rule number three: you were having a little too much fun when I caught you yesterday. From now on you will only masturbate when I order it; if I order it. Remember at all times; you're a toy for my pleasure. Not your own."

Abruptly Raven leaned down to Yang's raised face and kissed her. She mashed their lips together with a raw, lustful desire that Yang was helpless to deny. Her hands, still holding Yang's head in place, inched down to her mouth and gradually pried her jaw open. Raven's tongue darted in; invading her daughter's body and tasting at her saliva.

Raven at last relented, watching with amusement as the lines of spit joining their mouths together stretched and then snapped apart. Tears flowed silently down Yang's cheek as she glared at her mother.

"Oh Yang," Raven whispered to her daughter. "This is going to be so much fun."

Releasing her daughter's head, Raven leaned back and licked her lips. She reached between her legs toward a slowly growing bulge that Yang could not fail to notice being so close to it.

"No way," Yang grunted.

Raven laughed; a surprisingly girlish sound from her.

"No, honey," Raven chuckled. "It's real alright. Where do you think you got yours from?"

As Raven finally fished out her tool from the folds of her armored robe, Yang choked back a gasp of shock. Though it was stilly plainly in the process of hardening, it was already bigger than her own cock! Holding it mere inches away from Yang's stunned face, Raven gently stroked it to full length with a sadistic glee. Fully erect it was at least a foot and a half long, veined and with a raw, musky scent of lust.

Yang redoubled her efforts to escape but locked in the warm embrace of her mother's thighs, she might as well have been caught in a beartrap. Her escape futile, Yang closed her jaw, lips pressed together hard.

"My last fucktoy put up a struggle too," Raven said conversationally, pinching Yang's nose shut with one hand while guiding the bulbous head of her cock to Yang's lips with the other. "She didn't struggle for long."

Yang squirmed futilely for almost a minute; sweat beading on her reddening face until when she could last no more and she gasped desperately for air. Raven, enjoying the game, thrust forward with a note of satisfaction; wedging Yang's jaw open. Screaming, eyes flickering red, Yang bit down as hard as she could on the intruder. She had as much success as her punch did earlier. It was like trying to bite into a steel pole. By Raven's moans of pleasure she was probably only stimulating her more!

Raven adjusted her position on the edge of the chair slightly, drawing Yang closer till an entire third of her massive cock was enveloped in Yang's bulging mouth and tickling the back of her throat. That was enough for now; training Yang's throat would come in time.

Raven absentmindedly reached within the folds of her robe, playing with her own breasts while her cock was parked on the tongue of her daughter. She flicked at her own hard nipple, smiling inanely.

Yang, abandoning her struggles for escape, was focused on her struggles for breathing. Every few moments when Raven's cock twitched back an inch, Yang desperately inhaled a needy gasp of air before the entrance to her throat was plugged shut again. Through the haze of sweat and tears, she heard her mother's voice alternating between moans of pleasure and whispering instructions. "The faster you make me cum Yang, the faster I'll be done with you. Help Mommy out. Use your tongue more."

Out of options Yang hastily acquiesced her demands. She'd had boyfriends in the past who were always begging her to suck their dicks though of course none of them had possessed such a monstrous tool as her mother. The massaged the subtle creases and bumps of the shaft in her mouth with her tongue; coating it in her saliva which was now mixing with a steady flow of precum entering her mouth directly.

Unbearable seconds and minutes flowed by; Yang's jaw was aching and she was drained from relentlessly stimulating the unyielding rod jammed in her mouth. Raven squeezed her legs closer encouragingly as she felt a rush in her heavy balls; a mounting pressure. Finally the moment came; "I'm cumming!"

Raven's hands squeezed down on the arm of the chair as she drew Yang closer with her legs; caught between the cock in her mouth and her mother's toned legs, Yang felt her mouth flood with her mother's cum. Her lips wrapped tightly around the shaft made a perfect seal and there was only one direction for all that cum to go.

It poured down her throat in one endless rush; hot, thick and sticky but the force of Raven's ejaculation sent it straight into her waiting stomach. Yang lost track of the unbidden, gulps she took, consciousness receding as she struggled to keep up with the flow of cum.

"You've really inherited your father's dick-sucking skill," Raven noted with something close to pride. At last her muscled legs relented and sprang apart, depositing a limp Yang to the ground. "Consider that your breakfast. I hope you'll be looking forward to lunch and dinner later~…"