With Indiana Governor Mike Pence heading to the White House as Donald Trump‘s vice president, concern for the future of Planned Parenthood, which Pence spent his career trying to defund, is at a high among pro-choice supporters.

Donations to the organization were already skyrocketing in the wake of the election (Katy Perry announced she gave $10,000), but people across social media are encouraging friends to send their money with a twist — under Pence’s name.

Get push notifications with news, features and more.

When people give donations to Planned Parenthood, they can check a box to give their money in honor of Pence, with a certificate thanking the governor for the donation going to his office. Pence will not receive a tax deduction for the donations made in his name.

The idea is going viral on social media, with women and men pledging their support. And celebrities from Amy Schumer to Amber Tamblyn to Best Coast’s Bethany Cosentino posted about donating in Pence’s name.

“You should donate no matter what but omg this is genius,” Cosentino wrote, along with a photo of Pence’s address in Indiana.

“Done and done,” Schumer added.

Just donated to Planned Parenthood in Mike Pence's name, it's easy & a certificate will be sent to his office: pic.twitter.com/GJx3GdyBZl — Gabrielle Moss (@Gaby_Moss) November 12, 2016

me: lol i'm so poor

internet: "u can make an honorary donation to planned parenthood in mike pence's name"

me: pic.twitter.com/MKUSgwPeP3 — h (@hanncassady) November 13, 2016

donate to planned parenthood in honor of indiana gov. mike pence#EnjoyYourCertificate pic.twitter.com/h97XJSL0EO — sam catalano 🥖🦆 (@dashspaceSC) November 13, 2016

The pro-life governor has tried to down and diminish Planned Parenthood’s funding throughout his career. As a member of Congress in 2007, he introduced the first bill to defund the non-profit organization because they provide legal abortions to women. His bill was unsuccessful.

He has also backed anti-abortion legislation in the past, as governor of Indiana, he famously championed HB 1337, which was described by the Daily Beast as the “most extreme anti-abortion bill yet.” The bill — which was approved by the Indiana Senate and House of Representatives in March — would require abortion providers to bury or cremate fetuses, ban women from seeking abortions due to fetal diagnosis of physical or mental disability, among other restrictions. In June, a federal judge issued a preliminary injunction blocking the law from taking effect, citing that it violated a woman’s right to choose.

“If Planned Parenthood wants to be involved in providing counseling services and HIV testing, they ought not be in the business of providing abortions,” Pence told Politico in 2011. “As long as they aspire to do that, I’ll be after them.”

RELATED VIDEO: Women Getting IUDs After Trump Elected President

Cecile Richards, the president of Planned Parenthood, said the day after the election that they won’t back down under the Trump/Pence administration.

“Planned Parenthood’s been around for 100 years, we’ve been fighting for the right for reproductive healthcare for that long, and as we’ve said today, our doors stay open. And they will.”

The organization thanked people for their recent donations Saturday.

Thank you so much! We've been blown away by the support we've received. Many people are donating in Clinton or Pence's name. #WeWontGoBack — Planned Parenthood (@PPact) November 12, 2016

“Thank you so much! We’ve been blown away by the support we’ve received. Many people are donating in Clinton or Pence’s name. #WeWontGoBack“