Get the biggest What's On stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Visitors to Cardiff will be able to experience forest life through the eyes of the creatures who live there, thanks to a new virtual reality project.

In the Eyes of the Animal is a new free-to-use experience in the city's Bute Park that immerses users so fully they can see, hear and feel the natural habitat of woodland creatures.

Through the perspective of a mosquito, dragonfly, frog and owl, users are transported into a simulated version of their forest surroundings.

Users wear a virtual reality headset that is textured with bark and moss to reflect the natural environment and which gives them a 360° view of the forest floor and canopy when they move their heads.

A pack strapped on to backs enables them to feel the beating wings of a dragonfly and experience the forest in a unique way in an environment where nature meets technology.

Who is behind the project?

In the Eyes of the Animal was created by Marshmallow Laser Feast (MLF) who are pioneers in the virtual-meets-real-world arena and the project is a partnership between Cardiff City Council, Migrations and RSPB Cymru.

They were also behind last year's hugely successful spider's web which saw more than 10,000 visitors crawl through the hanging art work in Bute Park that was made entirely out of sticky tape.

How does it work?

In the Eyes of the Animal is filmed using unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and bespoke 360º cameras, and set to a binaural soundtrack using audio recordings sourced from the forest.

Via sculptural virtual reality headsets, users enter an environment where nature and technology collide and where they gave a unique insight into a simulated forest world.

Do I need a ticket?

No tickets are required and the experience is free to use. Four people will be able to use the headsets at any one time and there will be other organised park activities available for you while you wait.

When is it open?

In the Eyes of the Animal is open from July 15 to August 4 and from 8am to 7pm daily. If it's raining, it will not be open.

It is not suitable for children under five and children under 13 must be accompanied by a parent or guardian. The virtual reality section lasts 10 minutes but allow around 30 minutes for the experience in total.