Get the biggest Manchester United FC stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Manchester United managers are supposed to enjoy it when City lose. But Louis van Gaal had cause to wince when Christian Eriksen scored Tottenham’s winner at the Etihad Stadium on Sunday.

Not because it affected United – the title race hasn’t been any of their concern since well before Christmas. But rather because what Mauricio Pochettino is achieving at White Hart Lane this season means the Dutchman can no longer argue that he needs more time.

It’s a well-worn phrase for under-pressure managers. “We need more time”. But how much time is fair? Judging by what Pochettino is doing at Spurs, Van Gaal is running out.

The Argentinian was appointed at White Hart Lane in May 2014, two weeks after Van Gaal was confirmed as David Moyes’ successor at United.

He took over a team that finished sixth in 2014, a place and five points ahead of United. Last season, he led them to a fifth-place finish and now, halfway through his second season in charge, they’re involved in a credible challenge for Tottenham’s first title since 1961.

More impressively, though, at the same time he’s overseen a massive overhaul of the squad and made a profit in the transfer market. Since his appointment, Pochettino has bought 12 players for around £70m and sold 33 for a combined £84m. That’s a turnover of more than 50 players at a profit of nearly £15m.

Van Gaal, meanwhile, improved on United’s seventh-place finish in 2014 to finish fourth last season and qualify for the Champions League. But both the 64-year-old and captain Wayne Rooney admitted after the defeat at Sunderland at the weekend it will now be ‘difficult’ to match that this time - let alone build on it.

Van Gaal v Pochettino £258m spent by Van Gaal £95m recouped by Van Gaal -£163m Van Gaal net spend £70m spent by Pochettino £84m recouped by Pochettino +£14m Pochettino net spend

After taking a year to rebuild, United were supposed to be ready to challenge for the title at this stage of Van Gaal’s reign but it’s not worked out like that.

What’s more, the lack of progress is set against a backdrop of questionable decisions in the transfer market. United and Tottenham have seen a similar turnover of players over the last 18 months but Van Gaal has spent £258m and recouped £95m, a loss of £163m compared to Spurs’ profit.

Watch: Van Gaal's press conference after Sunderland defeat

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

It would be unfair to judge Van Gaal solely by the progress of one club under one manager. But it does offer some context.

There are other factors involved, but what Pochettino has achieved is the type of progress United were hoping for when they appointed Van Gaal - and he’s done it on a smaller budget.

Van Gaal may argue that he’s only halfway through a three-year contract and his project still needs more time. Pochettino, it would appear, has had plenty.