In February this year Zenimax Media Inc. announced the acquisition of virtual reality (VR) content developer Escalation Studios (Please, Don’t Touch Anything, Herobound Gladiators) to help with various projects. Now it’s been revealed that Escalation Studios has lent its talents to The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim VR, which is due for release on PlayStation VR this Friday, 17th November.

During an on-stage interview with Bethesda Softworks, Content Manager, Anne Lewis, she asked Andrew Scharf, Lead Producer, Bethesda Game Studios if the team had been working with anyone else to make The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim VR a reality, to which he responded: “We’re working with a great team at Escalation Studios. They recently joined the Zenimax family and we’re really happy to have them. They’ve been on the forefront of VR, they’re one of the best VR developers in the industry.”

Scharf went on to reveal Escalation Studios played a part in another of its big franchises coming to VR, Fallout 4 VR. “They’ve helped us hit the ground running with both Fallout and Skyrim VR,” he continued. “Helping us come up with smart solutions to some of the considerations you need to make when you’re developing a title for VR and redesigning games systems to work for VR.”

While both titles maybe several years old, the launch of The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim VR this week for PlayStation VR and Fallout 4 VR in December for HTC Vive, are hotly anticipated, offering players a new way to immerse themselves in these fantasy/sci-fi universes. And let’s not forget about DOOM VFR which is coming to both aforementioned headsets on 1st December.

For The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim VR fans looking for more info prior to launch then there’s always today’s livestream event to see the videogame in action, or read VRFocus’ most recent preview from Gamescom.

The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim VR will come complete with all the downloadable content (DLC) previously released for the videogame, Dawnguard, Hearthfire, and Dragonborn, but there won’t be mod support. Last week also saw Sony Interactive Entertainment (SIE) announce the PlayStation VR Skyrim VR Bundle featuring the title and the latest version of the headset.

VRFocus will continue its coverage of The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim VR, reporting back with any further updates.