"



- Tim "DaHanG" Fogarty "I'm thrilled to resign with Team Liquid as a Quake Champions player! I previously thought I would never compete in Quake again, but I am excited to know there will be a lot on the line over the next year in some big tournaments. Can't wait to play both duel and team Quake on LAN regularly and at the highest level I can

“I’ve always loved to play onstage, that pretty much answers that *laughs*. I like it a lot. For example, even for myself, I don’t have the time to play fighting games but I do like them, and I know the feeling I get when I watch a stream of Street Fighter or Killer Instinct. I’ve looked and I know how good the players are and I get to watch it at the highest level, I know the feeling of rooting for people and seeing that skill. I know that not just myself but my teammates and opponents help to bring that to a lot of people who love the game. I’m glad that I can showcase that and that people enjoy it.”

Tim "DaHanG" Fogarty - I thought the idea made a lot of sense to combine features from previous Quake games. The ultimate abilities are not too strong which also makes sense for a Quake title. Definitely a lot of potential as an esport if the right decisions are made.

Shane "rapha" Hendrixson







Tim "DaHanG" Fogarty









Back in July, we announced that we would be sending a team of four to compete at QuakeCon 2017 , with Shane "rapha" Hendrixson stepping down from Overwatch to commit to Quake full time. As one of the greatest Quake players in history, he was enthused by the franchise's new iteration and wanted to return to his roots. He was joined by Tim "DaHanG" Fogarty, another Quake legend, and the latter managed to reach the semifinals of the Duel event after an unfortunate teamkill in the previous round.Today, we are thrilled to announce that we have re-signed rapha and DaHanG to formalize our commitment to Quake Champions. They will represent Team Liquid in one of the most storied franchises in gaming, and we are eager to see them conquer the sport once again.You will be able to watch them this weekend at DreamHack: Denver as they compete in both Duel and Sacrifice. The winner of Duel will receive $14,000 and automatic qualification for DreamHack Winter 2017. Fortunately, rapha and DaHanG have already been invited to DH Winter, but expect them to put on a show at the National Western Complex.We hope that you'll be able to tune in and cheer for our players. If you're new to Quake and would like to learn more, you can drop in on our Discord and we'll try to guide you as we watch our team together.In the meantime, you can read about rapha's thoughts on the Evolution of Esports. He shares his memories of his illustrious past, his observations of the present, and his expectations for the future.An excerpt from the article:If you'd like to know more about Quake Champions, DaHanG and rapha shared their thoughts on the new game back in August. An excerpt from our interview: