Thomas Edward Patrick Brady II. Each name on it’s own is strong. Each of these names belong to one man. The one, Tom Brady. The greatest quarterback the NFL has ever seen.

I know, you hate him.

And it’s ok, it’s understandable. He is everything you wish you could be: Rich, tall, good-looking, model for a wife and most important, a champion. I’m not here to convince you his body of work is there. I’m here to help. Help you dislodge head from ass and maybe this season — after he serves his suspension — you can catch a few of his games and watch his greatness conduct his team like a beautiful orchestra.

Let us start with a little bit of background on the soon to be HOFer. Hailing from San Mateo, CA — Brady grow up a 49er/Joe Montana fan (whom he’s always said is his idol). He lights it up during his junior and senior year of high school then ends up at Michigan. He sits way behind Brian Griese for two-years at seventh on the depth chart. After a battle with rival QB Drew Henson, he finally starts a full season in 1998.

The next year the coach goes “Hey, Tom, you were good but not great, we are going to start you in the 1st quarter and then Drew in the 2nd, then at the half I’ll decide who starts.” (Place chip on shoulder).

They went 5–0 using this f***ed up system. He eventually prevailed as the starting quarterback after being put into a game down 17-points to Michigan State, nearly pulling out a win, but ultimately losing 34–31. He ended his collegiate career going 20–25 as a starter passing for 5,300 passing yards, 35-TDs and a completion percentage of 62.3.

Now we go to the NFL combine. Click this to see Brady’s hilarious combine video. Yeah the GMs, scouts and whoever else saw this weren’t too impressed either. Brady eventually gets drafted No. 199 by the New England Patriots. (Place another chip on the shoulder). The first season he was No. 4 on the depth chart and by the end of the season he became the backup. The following year starter Drew Bledsoe got injured and Brady replaced him, and went on to win his first Super Bowl beating “The Greatest Show on Turf”, the St. Louis Rams (Now the Los Angeles Rams) and his reign of terror has continued ever since.

First, let us address the elephant in the room: What I am saying right now is blasphemy for any 49er fan.

Maybe even to Tom Brady himself. Joe Montana is, in most eyes, considered the best quarterback — even to those who aren’t San Francisco fans. I won’t bore you with stats so, here’s a picture that sums up the important stuff. I’m sure that didn’t persuade at all. So look harder.

Use all the mental fortitude you have, while you are analyzing and processing think of Brady’s offensive help. Montana had the most legendary receiver in the history of the game. No argument. And there was also a running back by the name of Roger Craig.

Do you remember the last time Brady had a wide receiver that could blow the top off the defense or a least make the defense play honest?

I don’t.

He had Randy Moss past his prime. Remember those dark days when Moss was with the bunk-ass Raiders? It was sad. Brady made better for that brief time. The same goes for Amendola, Edelman, Brown, Branch — the list of wide receivers who Brady has made known is stupid. He had Aaron Hernandez, but ol’ boy likes to murder. Gronk is injured at least 4-6 games a season. But those two are just tight ends. Wes Welker was okay, but also not a deep threat and he himself has at least two concussions a game.

And not since Kevin Faulk, has the Patriots had a serviceable running back. But the man never complains. He just puts his head down and grinds it out every year.

Advantage Tommy.

He also holds hella records. And he holds all relevant QB records in the post-season: most division titles (13), most conference wins championships (6), most TDs (56), most yards yada-yada- yada the list goes on.

The most important is the four rings. He should have six— weird shit happened and baby Manning got two. Honestly I think the Gods were jealous of Brady and hated Peyton as much as I do. So win-win.

“But he cheats! He deflates footballs and his team records other teams practices”

Okay, the Patriots cheated. Spygate, that was the team effort. Deflategate, okay that was him and he got way more than he deserves with the 4-game suspension (another chip). They cheated because they’re bored. That’s how good they are. They want to get caught. It’s like people that steal; they get that rush knowing it’s wrong, knowing they might get caught but they want to feel alive. Dominating the league for 15-years gets boring. As for the flat balls. Who gives a shit? That game was over before the half and with properly inflated footballs Brady got his 4th ring.

Remember those chips that we placed upon his shoulder?

He has them still. The media and the fans that doubt his reign and lordship has just added more. Hell, the commissioner of the league hates on his winning ass. And he will use these chips to win at least two more Lombardi trophies…

Wait. Now that I think about it wasn’t His Airness Michael Jeffrey Jordan the same way?

Using the feeling of being overlooked as a catalyst for greatness. Being arrogant and in your face on how good they are. Because even though you can’t deny their skills, for some reason you doubt and bet against them anyway. It might not be true, but to them it’s very real. While you sit and doubt and hate on Tom Brady, all he’s w̶o̶r̶r̶i̶e̶d̶ ̶a̶b̶o̶u̶t̶ doing is throwing up W’s. All he does is win. At everything. Even life. We hate because his life is a dream we all wish we can have but we can’t. It’s his, Tom Edward Patrick Brady II.

Deal with it.

Embrace it.

And most of all enjoy his greatness while he still has it.