BBC Sport football expert Mark Lawrenson is predicting the outcome of every game at the 2016 European Championship.

Lawro correctly forecast that France, his pre-tournament pick to win the tournament, would beat Germany in their semi-final, but wrongly thought Wales would beat Portugal and make Sunday's final.

He picked the winner in two of the four quarter-finals, six of the eight last-16 ties and enjoyed a 42% success rate in the group stage, correctly guessing the outcome of 15 of the 36 games.

The only group he failed to get a single result in was Group F, which saw Hungary and Iceland spring a surprise by finishing first and second.

Before the tournament Lawro chose 11 of the 16 teams that went through to the first knockout stage.

Along with more than 375,000 of you, Lawro is taking part in the new BBC Sport Predictor game. He is going head-to-head with pundits, presenters and commentators from across BBC Sport.

He's doing well, but he is only in the running for a podium place - with a maximum of 40 points still to be won, commentator Alistair Bruce-Ball is certain of victory with one game to go.

BBC Sport Predictor: The pundits league - how it stands at the top Position Name Score 1 Alistair Bruce-Ball 570 = 2 Dan Walker 520 = 2 Ian Dennis 520 4 Phil McNulty 510 5 Mark Lawrenson 490

You can make your own prediction for the final and take on your friends and other fans using the BBC's Euros Predictor.

Lawro's final prediction - and selected others

Portugal v France Lawro 0-3 Ian Dennis 0-2 Kevin Kilbane 1-2 Phil McNulty 1-2 Danny Mills 1-3 Alan Shearer 1-3 Dan Walker 0-2 Steve Wilson 1-0

Sunday, 10 July

Portugal v France (20:00 BST, Stade de France)

Portugal have got to the final without playing well in any of their six matches in the tournament so far.

Other than putting a lot of crosses into the area for Cristiano Ronaldo and Nani, I am not sure what they offer going forward other than sitting back and waiting and waiting for the the opposition to make a mistake.

Their problem with doing that in this game is that they have not played a team as dangerous as France before. They have got so many players who will hurt Portugal if they give them time and space on the ball.

When you look at how France have got their goals, and who has got them, then they have got a lot of options on the field and on the bench in terms of who can do the damage.

I know it has been said that France are vulnerable at the back but they dealt pretty well with Germany in their semi-final.

Samuel Umtiti has come in and been outstanding in defence and, behind them, they have one of the best goalkeepers in the world in Hugo Lloris.

France will be fine even if they fall behind

Media playback is not supported on this device Highlights: Germany 0-2 France

Euro 2016 has not been a great tournament in terms of brilliant matches, but in terms of a spectacle, I just hope that France score early in the final.

Even if they go behind, I do not think they will be in trouble in the same way Wales were in their semi-final.

France have got more attacking weapons than any other team in the tournament and on top of that they have got momentum and home advantage.

Many of the best players over the past month have been French and in Antoine Griezmann they have the player of the tournament. He is an outstanding number 10 but what I love about him is that he is perfectly happy to track back and work when he is asked to as well.

I am convinced France will win but it is difficult to say whether this will be the start of a period of dominance for Les Bleus. Most of their talented attacking players are young, but it is hard to know how they will shape up as a team by the time the next World Cup comes round in 2018.

Lawro's prediction: 0-3

Lawro was speaking to BBC Sport's Chris Bevan.

Lawro's semi-final predictions

Games Score Lawro's prediction Wednesday, 6 July Portugal v Wales 2-0 1-1 (Wales to win on penalties) Thursday, 7 July Germany v France 0-2 0-2

Lawro's quarter-final predictions

Games Score Lawro's prediction Thursday, 30 June Poland v Portugal 1-1 (3-5 pens) 2-0 Friday, 1 July Wales v Belgium 3-1 0-2 Saturday, 2 July Germany v Italy 1-1 (6-5 pens) 2-0 Sunday, 3 July France v Iceland 5-2 2-0

Lawro's last-16 predictions