AUSTRALIAN football icon Les Murray has died aged 71 after a battle with illness.

The legendary broadcaster was for so long the voice of football in this country as a fixture on SBS.

Murray is survived by his two daughters.

CEO and managing director of SBS Michael Ebeid was quick to pay tribute to his “dear friend”, as was longtime colleague and former Socceroo Craig Foster.

“No one better embodied what SBS represents than Les Murray. From humble refugee origins, he became one of Australia’s most recognised and loved sporting identities,” Ebeid said.

“Not just a football icon, but a great Australian story and an inspiration to many. To say that his contribution to SBS and to football was enormous, doesn’t do it justice. This is a devastating loss for all of us at SBS. Our thoughts are with his family and all that loved him.”

Devastated at the news that our dear friend & colleague Les Murray has passed away. A great Australian who really has left a great legacy. — Michael Ebeid (@michaelebeid) July 31, 2017

The world lost a football colossus this morning, Les Murray AM. He fought well into extra time but whistle has blown. His legacy is lasting — Craig Foster (@Craig_Foster) July 31, 2017

Les left family that loved him, colleagues adored him, futbol community that revered him. Well played old friend. Extraordinary performance — Craig Foster (@Craig_Foster) July 31, 2017

Another former international Robbie Slater reflected fondly on Murray’s profound influence on the game and his own life.

“Les Murray was ‘Mr Soccer’ and devoted his life to the game and did so much for the game,” Slater told Fox Sports.

“Les was someone we all looked up to; he did so much for the game.

“He gave me my first job in television. Obviously when I started at Fox, we didn’t see each other as much but we never lost contact because wherever there was a major football event, Les was there.

“He gave me a lot of advice for my career, early on. People started following me when I moved to the Premier League but Les followed me in France and always made sure everyone knew what I was doing in France. He set up an interview with me in France, which was the first shown in Australia. It just shows how much he looked out for Australian football and footballers.

“Les is not only a great loss to his family and friends, but a great loss to the game.”

The tributes kept pouring in from football lovers, players and those who knew Murray.

RIP @lesmurraySBS,sad day for so many,xmb — Mark Bosnich (@TheRealBozza) July 31, 2017

Very sad to hear the passing of Les Murray. He was a Massive ambassador for football in this country.... — Archie Thompson (@10Archie) July 31, 2017

Utterly devastating. What a man. So generous and kind. He gave us so much. Vale Les Murray. https://t.co/Hg7hPa0V2r — Sarah Abo (@_SarahAbo) July 31, 2017

For once the phrase "end of an era" is legitimate in a football context. Vale Les Murray https://t.co/yE73viuX2k — Tom Smithies (@SmithiesTele) July 31, 2017

In the days when football struggled to receive media coverage, @lesmurraySBS gave us hope each week via @TheWorldGame, he will be missed — Peter Filopoulos (@peterfilopoulos) July 31, 2017

Les Murray was funny, arcerbic, generous, flawed, kind and unique. Most of all, when most needed, he was Mr Football.#RIPLesMurray — Richard Hinds (@rdhinds) July 31, 2017

Very sorry to hear of Les Murray's passing. A football legend, advocate for people seeking asylum and an amazing personality. — Richard Di Natale (@RichardDiNatale) July 31, 2017

Vale Les Murray. We lost a giant in Australian football. Hard to imagine a World Cup without his voice. — Sam Mac & Jules (@thebleague) July 31, 2017

Murray was born in Hungary and came to Australia with his parents as political refugees in the 1950s. He grew up in Wollongong on the NSW coast where his love of football continued to grow.

Born László Ürge, Murray changed his name once he started in television.

He joined SBS in 1980, where he worked for more than three decades. He went on to become the network’s head of sport and retired in 2014, but still made guest TV appearances with his old employer.

Murray presented the network’s football coverage and worked on everything from World Cups to Champions League finals. He was appointed a Member of the Order of Australia in 2006 and was also a member of Football Federation Australia’s Hall of Fame.

A published author, Murray was part of FIFA’s ethics committee and worked tirelessly to promote football in Australia at a time when it was far from the mainstream sport it is today.

Murray received the Lifetime Achievement Award for Contribution to Sports Journalism at the 2009 Australian Sports Commission Media Awards.