From renderings to reality, changes are coming to Cleveland's skyline.

Billions of dollars are being spent on construction in the city ahead of the Republican National Convention this summer.

But the upgrades, renovations and development projects won't end when the convention leaves town.

Here's a look at some of the projections that may change Cleveland in the next four years:

Case Western Reserve University and Cleveland Clinic Health Education Campus

What: The 485,000 square-foot building will house students from Case Western Reserve's schools of medicine, dental medicine and nursing.

Location: East 93rd Street between Euclid and Chester Avenues

Timeline: Completion expected in summer 2019

Rendering of Health Education Campus

Hilton Cleveland Downtown

What: The hotel will feature a 28-story tower with 600 guest rooms.

Location: 100 Lakeside Avenue East, Cleveland, Ohio

Timeline: The hotel will start accepting reservations for arrival on June 15, 2016.

RELATED: Hilton breaks ground for Convention Center hotel

Hilton Cleveland Donwtown rendering

Huntington Bank Building

What: Renovation ideas include a high-end hotel, apartments, office space and rooftop restaurant and bar.

Sign up for the daily Top 3 Newsletter Thank you Something went wrong. This email will be delivered to your inbox once a day in the morning. Thank you for signing up for The Top 3 Newsletter Please try again later.

Submit

Where: 905 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio

Timeline: Renovation completion expected in 2018

RELATED: Big plans for one of Cleveland's most historic buildings

Huntington Bank Building

Nautica Waterfront District

What: Changes include an additional 664 residential units, a 150-room hotel, a 15-story office building and 3,175 new parking spaces.

Location: 2014 Sycamore Street, Cleveland, Ohio

Timeline: The project has a seven-year development plan. It's set to break ground in 2018.

RELATED: Major expansion announced for Cleveland's Nautica waterfront

Nautica rendering.

NuCLEus

What: A $300 million project that includes a 30-story office tower, parking garage, 500 apartments, shopping and restaurants.

Location: 501 High Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio

Timeline: Completion expected early 2017

RELATED: New nuCLEus Project would change Cleveland's skyline

Jan. 9, 2015: Image rendering of the nuCLEus project in downtown Cleveland. The project will be at E. 4th, Prospect and Huron with a 30-story office tower, retail space, residential units, parking and more. It could be complete by 2017.

515 Euclid

What: The project will add approximately 200 apartments above an existing parking garage and retail space.

Location: 515 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio

515 Euclid

Public Square

What: A $50 million project to increase the square's green space, close it to traffic except for buses and open a cafe at the site.

Location: Near 91 Public Square, Cleveland, Ohio

Timeline: Completion expected on June 1, 2016

RELATED: Public Square renovation progress one year later

PHOTOS | Public Square renovation renderings

Terminal Tower

What: Plans include turning the building's lower floors into 300 apartments.

Location: 50 Public Square, Cleveland, Ohio

Timeline: Construction could begin as early as 2018

RELATED: Company plans apartments in Terminal Tower

Terminal Tower

Restaurant Additions

Jimmy Buffett’s Margaritaville

Location: Front Avenue across from Punch Bowl Social

Timeline: Set to open in late 2016

RELATED: Jimmy Buffett's Margaritaville coming to Cleveland's Flats

Nuevo Modern Mexican Restaurant & Tequila Bar

Location: East 9th Street Pier, Cleveland, Ohio

Timeline: Expected to open in July 2016

RELATED: Cleveland Rising: Lakefront development begins

Rascal Flatts Restaurant

Location: Flats East Bank, between Crop's On Air Studio and Beerhead Bar & Eatery

Timeline: Expected to open in 2016

RELATED: Rascal Flatts opening restaurant/bar in Cleveland's Flats

MOBILE USERS: Click here for locations on map