SAN FRANCISCO, CA - OCTOBER 31: Tim Lincecum #55 of the San Francisco Giants waves to the crowd during the San Francisco Giants World Series victory parade on October 31, 2012 in San Francisco, California. The San Francisco Giants beat the Detroit Tigers to win the 2012 World Series. (Photo by Ezra Shaw/Getty Images) (Ezra Shaw/Getty Images)





SAN FRANCISCO (CBS SF) – The Giants overcame the Kansas City Royals in a do-or-die Game 7 on enemy soil to win the World Series Wednesday night, so get ready for a party – a big one. San Francisco is planning a welcome home bash for Halloween-day.

Team officials have been planning for days to be ready to host the city’s third victory parade in five years, and they’re counting on previous experience to help make things as smooth and enjoyable as 2010 and 2012. As in previous years, the center of the action will be on Market Street as it approaches the Civic center from the East. The official starting point for a parade has moved up to Market St at Stuart St. (Planners originally slated it for 2nd and Market but plans are constantly shifting).

From there, the “Parade of Champions” will march west on Market before veering right on McAllister to the steps of City Hall. Here’s the planned route:

KPIX 5 parade coverage will begin at 11 a.m.

KPIX LIVE WEB STREAM: Any Giants events available will be live-streamed online here. KPIX Live video works on mobile devices including iPhones, Androids, iPads, and more

The impending Halloween-morning rainstorm could affect the timing of any parade. The parade will actually get rolling slightly later this year (it was 11 a.m. in the past). This year, the festivities start around noon and culminate with speeches from players and dignitaries in front of San Francisco City Hall. In the past the parade portion has lasted about an hour and a half. The length and timing of the speeches are a big variable, depending on how big a show the city and team plan to put on. The entire event would wrap up by around 4 p.m. Combine the event with a planned Critical Mass cycling protest, and the commute home for San Francisco-based workers hoping to trick-or-treat with kids in the suburbs could be particularly painful.

TRAFFIC: KCBS Live Traffic Map

Complete street closure information will be made available prior to the event. As always, you can get the latest on local freeway conditions from the KCBS Traffic Maps.

The KPIX 5 forecast calls for the chance of rain moving in right around the lunch hour on Halloween. So unless you enjoy partying like 2012 Marco Scutaro in the rain, plan on bringing an umbrella.

Click the following links to get transit info for Caltrain, BART and Muni, which will likely be the most heavily trafficked public transit options for the events. BART says they will run rush hour service all day long and operate until 2 a.m. to handle the crowds, Caltrain won’t be adding trains but does say it will “provide extra capacity” on existing runs. Runs out of San Francisco at the end of the day will take off when the trains reach capacity. The Golden Gate Ferry says extra ferries have been added to the schedule, they will be loaded up and sent when full, rather than operating on a schedule. Riders are encouraged to buy tickets in advance or use a Clipper Card.

Want to prepare by re-living the last two parades? Check out these photo galleries from 2010 and 2012.

Complete Giants Coverage: