Note: Before we began our drive from NYC to Argentina, we considered completely skipping over Mexico because we were terrified by endless news reports of constant violence. Our plan was to fly to Guatemala, buy a car, and start driving from there. After speaking to some travelers, we decided to start our drive in NYC and pass through Mexico. We thought it would only take days, but Mexico hooked us in. These are just a few things we learned after a month in this amazing country.

1. Hole in the wall restaurant owners may also be former luchadors (Mexican professional wrestlers) and regale you with stories from their times in the ring… you don’t know until you ask.

2. Baby goat, cabrito, is a popular dish in northern Mexico. If you ask, you might be able to help prepare one (i.e., chop one in half with a meat cleaver).

Find these tacos in Guanajuato. Whatever it takes. No matter the cost. It will be worth it.

3. The 8 peso (50 cent) tacos from a street stall will be the best tacos you’ve ever had. If you’re spending more than that on a taco you’re getting ripped off (try out the taco stall, Taco’s Campeon, across from the Santa Fe tunnel in Guanajuato for the best ones we’ve come across).

4. You do not get instantly murdered or kidnapped when you cross the Mexican border. In fact, despite what you read in the news, there’s almost a 0% chance of this happening - hundreds of thousands of people do it every day.

Absolutely magico

5. A stroll through Zacatecas at night will be one of the most enchanting walks of your life. Golden lights bathe the colonial era buildings, creating a cityscape unlike anywhere else in the world.

6. Mexico City is infinite, containing a piece of every type of world in this one city. But in general, it is more modern than many American cities.

7. Burritos are an American obsession. Tacos, tortas and quesadillas dominate the cheap food landscape south of the border.

8. Cancun, Puerto Vallarta, Los Cabos, Tulum… these are all amazing destinations, but they don’t tell the full story of Mexico. There is another side of Mexico outside of the resort, a Mexico with a different type of unimaginable beauty, awaiting you with open arms and delicious tacos. Check out Guanajuato, San Cristobal de Las Casas, or the small beaches of Oaxaca for incredibly unique and authentic experiences.