No. in

series No. in

season Title Directed by Written by Original air date Villain(s)

A mysterious bat-like creature terrorizes Gotham City, causing the police force to pursue Batman. The Dark Knight must find the real perpetrator to clear his name.

After escaping Arkham Asylum on Christmas Eve, the Joker takes over Gotham's airwaves and terrorizes the city for a crime. He challenges Batman and Robin to find his hidden TV studio and free his hostages – Commissioner Gordon, Detective Bullock and Summer Gleeson – before midnight.

Batman encounters the Scarecrow and attempts to foil his scheme to burn down Gotham University, but in the process is exposed to the Scarecrow's fear gas, and is forced to face his own guilt over the death of his parents. Note: This episode introduced the popular line "I am vengeance. I am the night. I am Batman!"[1]

4 4 "The Last Laugh" Kevin Altieri Carl Swenson September 22, 1992 ( ) The Joker

The Joker covers Gotham City in a cloud of laughing gas and begins plundering the crazed city. But after Alfred is infected with the toxin, Batman has added incentive to stop the Joker and acquire an antidote from him before all of Gotham dies with a smile.

When District Attorney Harvey Dent collapses after a meal with his fiancée Pamela Isley and friend Bruce Wayne, doctors discover that he has been poisoned. Batman must find the culprit and the antidote before the DA's time runs out.

6 6 "The Underdwellers" Frank Paur Story by : Tom Ruegger

Teleplay by : Jules Dennis and Richard Mueller October 21, 1992 ( ) Sewer King

Batman traces a series of bizarre robberies on the streets of Gotham back to a band of homeless children, who have been raised to do the bidding of their master, the Sewer King.

7 7 "P.O.V." Kevin Altieri Story by : Mitch Brian

Teleplay by : Sean Catherine Derek and Laren Bright September 18, 1992 ( ) The Drug Lord

and his Gangsters

A botched police operation results in the suspension of those involved: Officer Wilkes, Officer Montoya, and Detective Bullock. Confronted by their superiors, each of them is forced to tell their tale of what happened that night. The episode is similar in structure to Akira Kurosawa's film Rashomon.

8 8 "The Forgotten" Boyd Kirkland Jules Dennis, Richard Mueller and Sean Catherine Derek October 8, 1992 ( ) Boss Biggis

and his henchmen

While investigating the disappearances of Gotham's homeless in an undercover disguise, Bruce Wayne is kidnapped and imprisoned in a chain gang mining camp, suffering from amnesia. Alfred must thus track him down, help him escape, and free the rest of the prisoners.

9 9 "Be a Clown" Frank Paur Ted Pedersen and Steve Hayes September 16, 1992 ( ) The Joker

Mayor Hamilton Hill's miserable son, Jordan, becomes even sadder when his father uses his birthday party as a political gathering rather than a normal celebration, and ends up stowing away in the truck of the party clown hired by Hill for the party, whom he doesn't know is actually the Joker in disguise. It is now up to Batman, whom Mayor Hill distrusts, to rescue the boy before it is too late.

10 10 "Two-Face: Part 1" Kevin Altieri Story by : Alan Burnett

Teleplay by : Randy Rogel September 25, 1992 ( ) Rupert Thorne

Mobster Rupert Thorne attempts to use Harvey Dent's secret split personality to blackmail him. But when Dent meets with Thorne at a chemical plant, "Big Bad Harv" takes over, and the resulting confrontation leads to an explosion that horribly scars half of Dent's face.

11 11 "Two-Face: Part 2" Kevin Altieri Randy Rogel September 28, 1992 ( ) Rupert Thorne

and Two-Face

Harvey Dent, now calling himself Two-Face, resurfaces and starts robbing Rupert Thorne's illegal businesses, preparing for a final confrontation with the crime boss, and Batman must stop his former friend before he and Thorne kill each other. Note: Batman's method of defeating Two-Face in this episode (using a case of coins) was later used in the climax of Batman Forever.

12 12 "It's Never Too Late" Boyd Kirkland Story by : Tom Ruegger

Teleplay by : Garin Wolf September 10, 1992 ( ) (weekday)

January 17, 1993 ( ) (primetime) Rupert Thorne

and Arnold Stromwell

A mob war between crime bosses Rupert Thorne and Arnold Stromwell is nearing its end, and comes to a climax when Stromwell is set up to be killed in an exploding restaurant by Thorne. Batman saves him at the last moment, and aided by Stromwell's brother (now a priest who lost his leg years before, an accident for which Stromwell carries a secret guilt), tries to persuade him to give up his life of crime and help the police bring Thorne down by testifying against him.

13 13 "I've Got Batman in My Basement" Frank Paur Sam Graham and Chris Hubbell September 30, 1992 ( ) The Penguin

During a fight with Batman over a stolen Fabergé egg, the Penguin incapacitates Batman with poison gas. The Dark Knight is rescued by a teenage amateur detective named Sherman Grant and his friend Roberta, who hide Batman in Sherman's basement long enough for him to recover before the Penguin finds them.

Bitter scientist Victor Fries, as Mr. Freeze, attacks several divisions of GothCorp, each time stealing a piece for a secret weapon he intends to build. Batman investigates the connections, and discovers that the start of Freeze's vendetta against GothCorp was a bitter falling out between Fries and GothCorp's CEO, Ferris Boyle (Mark Hamill), during which Boyle almost killed Fries (mutating him into Freeze) and presumably killed Fries' terminally ill wife, Nora. Batman must find a way to bring Boyle to justice before Freeze carries out his revenge. Note: This episode won the series a 1993 Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing in an Animated Program.[2]

15 15 "The Cat and the Claw: Part 1" Kevin Altieri Story by : Sean Catherine Derek and Laren Bright

Teleplay by : Jules Dennis and Richard Mueller September 5, 1992 ( ) Catwoman and Red Claw

Batman encounters a new cat burglar calling herself Catwoman, and around the same time, meets a woman named Selina Kyle (as Bruce Wayne), to whom he is visibly attracted. When Selina runs into trouble with a terrorist group known as The Red Claw, who want the mountain lion sanctuary she was trying to protect, she decides to take matters into her own hands and investigate.

16 16 "The Cat and the Claw: Part 2" Dick Sebast Story by : Sean Catherine Derek and Laren Bright

Teleplay by : Jules Dennis and Richard Mueller September 12, 1992 ( ) Red Claw

The leader of the Red Claw group (known herself only as Red Claw) attacks a military train and steals a viral plague, which she intends to release in Gotham if she isn't paid a ransom, and Batman and Catwoman must put aside their differences and work together to stop Red Claw before it is too late.

17 17 "See No Evil" Dan Riba Martin Pasko February 24, 1993 ( ) Lloyd Ventrix

Lloyd "Eddie" Ventrix is on the verge of losing his daughter, Kimberly, to his ex-wife, Helen, due to his past as a con artist. Determined not to lose Kimberly, Ventrix dons a suit, stolen from where he used to work while on parole, which grants the user invisibility but also becomes highly toxic, and poses as Kimberly's imaginary friend, Mojo, while stealing jewellery for her. Batman must solve the mystery crimes and stop Ventrix, despite the fact that he cannot even see him. Note: Michael Gross, who provided the voice of Ventrix, later voiced Warren McGinnis in Batman Beyond.

18 18 "Beware the Gray Ghost" Boyd Kirkland Story by : Dennis O'Flaherty and Tom Ruegger

Teleplay by : Garin Wolf and Tom Ruegger November 4, 1992 ( ) The Mad Bomber

Simon Trent, an actor best known for his past role as "The Gray Ghost", is on the verge of bankruptcy thanks to his declining career. To save himself, he sells off all of his Gray Ghost merchandise. Immediately afterwards, a series of crimes related to the old show begin to occur. Batman, having himself been inspired partly by the show to become the crimefighter he now is, goes to Trent for help, and they team up to put an end to the crimes, and also revive Trent's career. Note: The Gray Ghost was voiced by Adam West, the star of the 1960s television show Batman.

19 19 "Prophecy of Doom" Frank Paur Story by : Dennis Marks

Teleplay by : Sean Catherine Derek October 6, 1992 ( ) Nostromos and Lucus

Batman investigates a cult, called the Brotherhood, founded by the "mystic" Nostromos, after hearing about a number of stories from his colleagues about his ability to predict the future. Batman finds out that Nostromos is actually a con artist who was rigging near-fatal accidents to gain the confidence of Gotham's upper class citizens, and he must expose this ruse before it is too late.

20 20 "Feat of Clay: Part 1" Dick Sebast Story by : Marv Wolfman and Michael Reaves

Teleplay by : Marv Wolfman September 8, 1992 ( ) Roland Daggett

Bruce Wayne is framed for the attempted murder of Lucius Fox. The real perpetrator is an actor and master of disguise named Matt Hagen, who was disfigured in a car accident years ago. In order to keep his fame, he secretly started working for Roland Daggett, who provides him with a monthly supply of an addictive face cream known as Renuyu (a pun on "Renew You") that can temporarily reshape his face back to normal, and who wants to take Wayne Enterprises over for marketing expansion. For botching the murder, Hagen's supply is cut off, and when he breaks into Daggett's lab for more Renuyu, he pays the price dearly when Daggett's men drench his face in the formula and force him to swallow liters of it to avoid drowning. Meanwhile, Bruce Wayne is arrested and taken into custody, charged with the assault on Fox.

21 21 "Feat of Clay: Part 2" Kevin Altieri Story by : Marv Wolfman and Michael Reaves

Teleplay by : Michael Reaves September 9, 1992 ( ) Clayface and

Roland Daggett

Bruce Wayne is released from prison on bail. Hagen, as it turns out, survived the murder attempt on him, but at a high cost: the formula entered his body and soaked every single one of his cells, turning him into a shape-shifting mutant. With his newfound powers, Hagen, now calling himself Clayface, decides to take his revenge on Daggett and his men, and Batman must bring Daggett to justice and stop Clayface before innocent people are hurt.

22 22 "Joker's Favor" Boyd Kirkland Paul Dini September 11, 1992 ( ) (weekday)

January 31, 1993 ( ) (primetime) The Joker and Harley Quinn

After a man named Charlie Collins curses at the Joker on the road for offensive driving, the Clown Prince of Crime corners him and intimidates him into doing him a "small favor". Two years pass, and the Joker finally decides how to use Charlie: to sneak a bomb into the Peregrinator's Club, where Commissioner Gordon is to give a speech at an award ceremony. Charlie, who merely has to open the door, is skeptical at first, but for the sake of his family, he reluctantly decides to obey. Note: This episode features the debut appearance of the Joker's accomplice and love interest, Harley Quinn.

23 23 "Vendetta" Frank Paur Michael Reaves October 5, 1992 ( ) Killer Croc

Detective Bullock is arrested for kidnapping. Batman, who dislikes Bullock but nevertheless believes him to be a good man, investigates, and discovers the identity of the real criminal: Killer Croc, who harbors a vendetta against Bullock for capturing him once. Batman must clear Bullock's name before it is too late.

24 24 "Fear of Victory" Dick Sebast Samuel Warren Joseph September 29, 1992 ( ) The Scarecrow

The Scarecrow invents a fear chemical that is activated by adrenaline. Then, he uses it to affect the outcome of athletic events. Whenever a single person becomes agitated, the fear chemical kicks in, turning his excitement to fear. The Scarecrow bets against the sports stars' teams as part of his criminal scheme to scare up some quick cash, and Batman and Robin must foil his plot.

25 25 "The Clock King" Kevin Altieri David Wise September 21, 1992 ( ) Clock King

After his company goes bankrupt, Temple Fugate becomes the Clock King. Fugate sets out to seek his revenge against the man whom he blames for his misfortunes: Mayor Hamilton Hill. Fugate kidnaps Hill, intending to do away with him to accomplish his revenge. Batman must stop Fugate from carrying out his revenge and save the mayor's life.

26 26 "Appointment in Crime Alley" Boyd Kirkland Gerry Conway September 17, 1992 ( ) Roland Daggett

With the help of arsonists, Roland Daggett plans to destroy Crime Alley and use the land to expand his business empire. Note: Based on the comic-book story "There Is No Hope in Crime Alley" (Detective Comics #457, March 1976) by Denny O'Neil and Dick Giordano.

27 27 "Mad as a Hatter" Frank Paur Paul Dini October 12, 1992 ( ) The Mad Hatter

Miserable Wayne Industries scientist Jervis Tetch is unable to pursue the girl he loves, Alice the secretary. When she splits up from her boyfriend, he makes an advance and develops a fast friendship with her, until her boyfriend reconciles with her and proposes to her. Enraged, Tetch decides to take matters into his own hands, and dons the mantle of the Mad Hatter, using his mind-control devices to force those who have wronged him all his life to become his mindless slaves.

28 28 "Dreams in Darkness" Dick Sebast Judith & Garfield Reeves-Stevens November 3, 1992 ( ) (weekday)

December 20, 1992 ( ) (primetime) The Scarecrow

Batman is incarcerated in Arkham Asylum after being exposed to the Scarecrow's fear-inducing gas. Batman knows that the Scarecrow has escaped for the second time and is planning to poison Gotham's water supply with the same fear-inducing gas, and he must bring himself to break the law and escape from Arkham before the Scarecrow brings Gotham to its knees. Notes: Loosely based on "Batman: The Last Arkham" of Batman: Shadow of the Bat #1–4 by Alan Grant. This episode adapted the comic book story with the inclusion of the Scarecrow instead of Victor Zsasz and Dr. Bartholomew instead of Jeremiah Arkham.

#1–4 by Alan Grant. This episode adapted the comic book story with the inclusion of the Scarecrow instead of Victor Zsasz and Dr. Bartholomew instead of Jeremiah Arkham. The Scarecrow's scheme in this episode was similarly used by Ra's al Ghul (with assistance from the Scarecrow) in Batman Begins .

. The Joker's real name is implied to be Jack Napier when Dr. Bartholomew, who thinks the patients' alter egos as supervillains are a product of Batman's fantasy, mentions it among the names Harvey Dent and Pamela Isley.

29 29 "Eternal Youth" Kevin Altieri Beth Bornstein September 23, 1992 ( ) Poison Ivy

Several rich industrialists are invited to the Eternal Youth Health Spa, and that's where they are last seen before disappearing. The only connection: they had something to do with the death of plants. Bruce Wayne also receives an invitation (although it was one of his greedy directors who nearly made the deal to destroy a rainforest before Bruce forced him to shut the operation down), but Alfred and his "lady friend", Maggie, go in his place. When they do not return, Batman is forced to investigate, discovering that the spa is run by Poison Ivy, and that she has been using a formula to turn the industrialists into humanoid trees, including Alfred and Maggie.

30 30 "Perchance to Dream" Boyd Kirkland Story by : Laren Bright and Michael Reaves

Teleplay by : Joe R. Lansdale October 19, 1992 ( ) (weekday)

March 14, 1993 ( ) (primetime) The Mad Hatter

Bruce Wayne wakes up one morning to find that his life is completely upside-down: his parents are alive, the Batcave does not exist, Alfred does not remember Robin, and he is engaged to Selina Kyle. However, it doesn't mean that Batman isn't still around, and Bruce starts to wonder what has happened, especially after seeing the characteristics of a dream (such as book and newspaper prints not making sense) inside this new life.

31 31 "The Cape and Cowl Conspiracy" Frank Paur Elliot S. Maggin October 14, 1992 ( ) Josiah Wormwood

Baron Jozek, furious at Batman for humiliating him at a dinner party (over Jozek's underworld connections), hires Josiah Wormwood, a master in setting traps for his victims, to hunt down Batman and bring back the hero's cape and cowl. Note: Based on the comic-book story "The Cape and Cowl Death Trap!" from Detective Comics #450 August 1975, written by Elliot S. Maggin.

32 32 "Robin's Reckoning: Part 1" Dick Sebast Randy Rogel February 7, 1993 ( ) (primetime)

May 17, 1993 ( ) (weekday) Tony Zucco and Arnold Stromwell

During a fight with some gangsters at a construction yard, Batman and Robin learn the name of their boss: Billy Marin. While Robin looks forward to going up against Marin, Batman becomes distant, and after a falling out at the Batcave, Batman doesn't allow Robin to accompany him on the search for Marin. Robin investigates on the Batcomputer, and soon realizes that Billy Marin is not the boss' real name. Rather, it is an alias of Tony Zucco, the man who killed his parents (which Batman already knew, but chose not to tell Robin). Notes: The flashbacks to Robin's origin story is based on Detective Comics #38 (June, 1940).

#38 (June, 1940). This episode won the 1993 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program (for Programming Less Than One Hour).[2]

33 33 "Robin's Reckoning: Part 2" Dick Sebast Randy Rogel February 14, 1993 ( ) (primetime)

May 18, 1993 ( ) (weekday) Tony Zucco

Angered by Batman's deceit, Robin sets out to find Tony Zucco on his own, all the while plagued by the memories of his parents' death and how Bruce took him in as his own son. Eventually, Batman manages to find Zucco at an old amusement park, but breaks his leg during the fight. Robin finally arrives and prepares to kill Zucco in revenge.

34 34 "The Laughing Fish" Bruce W. Timm Paul Dini January 10, 1993 ( ) (primetime)

April 27, 1993 ( ) (weekday) The Joker and Harley Quinn

Joker creates a toxin that affects only fish, mutating them into Joker fish. Then, he targets innocent men who refuse to copyright his Joker fish. The Joker also captures Harvey Bullock, and Batman must rescue him and foil the Clown Prince of Crime's insane scheme. Note: This episode is based on three Batman comics, blended together; "The Joker's Five-Way Revenge" from Batman #251 September 1973 by Denny O'Neil with art by Neal Adams, followed by "The Laughing Fish" and "Sign of the Joker!" from Detective Comics #475 and #476, of February/March 1978, both by writer Steve Englehart with art by Marshall Rogers.

35 35 "Night of the Ninja" Kevin Altieri Steve Perry October 26, 1992 ( ) Kyodai Ken

A mysterious ninja is robbing Wayne Enterprises subsidiaries, and Batman discovers that the ninja is actually his equal in combat. A grudge against Bruce Wayne and skills to match him can only mean one person: Kyodai Ken, an old rival of Wayne's teacher from his days in Japan, and who was thrown out of the dojo after attempting to rob it, only to be stopped by Wayne. Ken, it turns out, wants revenge.

36 36 "Cat Scratch Fever" Boyd Kirkland Story by : Sean Catherine Derek

Teleplay by : Buzz Dixon November 5, 1992 ( ) Roland Daggett and

Professor Milo

Batman must stop Roland Daggett's plan to release a viral plague designed by Professor Milo into Gotham by way of its stray cat population. The case gains new urgency when Catwoman becomes infected with the virus during her search for her missing cat, Isis. Now, Batman must find an antidote to save the woman who loves him most.

37 37 "The Strange Secret of Bruce Wayne" Frank Paur Story by : David Wise

Teleplay by : Judith & Garfield Reeves-Stevens October 29, 1992 ( ) (weekday)

February 28, 1993 ( ) (primetime) Hugo Strange, The Joker,

Two-Face and The Penguin

After a prominent judge is injured during a struggle with some thugs demanding money from her in exchange for a strange tape, Bruce Wayne decides to take a trip to Yucca Springs, a resort where the judge had vacationed, and consult Dr. Hugo Strange, a psychiatrist. Bruce soon learns that Strange has invented a machine that extracts people's darkest secrets from their minds and transfers them to videotape — and now Strange has proof of Bruce's secret identity as Batman, and plans to auction it to three of Gotham's prominent crime bosses. Note: Based on the comic stories "The Dead Yet Live" and "I Am the Batman!" from Detective Comics #471 and #472, of August/September 1977 by Steve Englehart.

#471 and #472, of August/September 1977 by Steve Englehart. Dr. Strange's scheme in this episode was similarly used by the Riddler in Batman Forever.

Several robberies take place at major companies, including Wayne Enterprises, and Bruce Wayne, as Batman, discovers the thief to be a mechanical briefcase. Bruce meets with his old friend, Karl Rossum, an expert in robotics who lost his daughter to a vehicle accident years ago. He also meets Rossum's assistant, Randa Duane, and Rossum's ultimate creation: a prototype A.I. known as Holographic Analytical Reciprocating Digital Computer (H.A.R.D.A.C.) Bruce invites Duane to dinner, and around the same time, certain civilians start acting strangely. Most surprising is when Duane unexpectedly leaves Wayne Manor while Bruce is on the phone, and the entire Batcave turns on Batman. Note: This episode marks the series' debut appearance of Barbara Gordon, not yet Batgirl. All of Barbara's starring appearances were in episodes written by Brynne Stephens.

39 39 "Heart of Steel: Part 2" Kevin Altieri Brynne Stephens November 17, 1992 ( ) H.A.R.D.A.C.

Batman manages to free himself from the Batcave's clutches, and brings it back under his control, although he fails to track Duane down. Barbara Gordon approaches Batman to inform him of her father's sudden change in behavior. A brutal fight between Batman and Detective Bullock ensues, during which Batman pushes Bullock onto the Bat Signal, and reveals him to actually be an android, meaning that the real Bullock and James Gordon have gone missing, and Batman knows who the culprit is: H.A.R.D.A.C. Batman must stop the evil supercomputer before it is too late.

40 40 "If You're So Smart, Why Aren't You Rich?" Eric Radomski David Wise November 18, 1992 ( ) (weekday)

January 3, 1993 ( ) (primetime) The Riddler

Edward Nygma creates the video game The Riddle of the Minotaur for the company Competitron, but is fired by his superior Daniel Mockridge, who wants the profits for himself. Nygma vows revenge, and takes up the mantle of the Riddler two years later. While Batman sympathizes with Nygma, he and Robin find themselves forced to stop him before he kills Mockridge in a life-sized version of the Minotaur maze. Despite successfully rescuing Mockridge, who complete a deal to move his company to Gotham, the incident leaves him in a permanent all-consuming fear of Nygma's return for revenge. Note: This episode features the series' debut appearance of The Riddler. Fun fact: When Robin is playing the Minotaur game on the Batcave computer, the majority of the sound effects heard from the game are actually from the NES game Super Mario Bros. 3.

41 41 "Joker's Wild" Boyd Kirkland Paul Dini November 19, 1992 ( ) The Joker and

Cameron Kaiser

Cameron Kaiser builds a casino hotel modeled after the Joker, called "The Joker's Wild". The Joker sees this on the news and, enraged, escapes from Arkham again, with one thought on his mind: destroying the casino, unaware that this is exactly what Kaiser wants him to do as part of an insurance claim.

42 42 "Tyger Tyger" Frank Paur Story by : Michael Reaves and Randy Rogel

Teleplay by : Cherie Wilkerson October 30, 1992 ( ) Tygrus and Dr. Emile Dorian

Selina Kyle is kidnapped by the villainous genetic engineer Dr. Emile Dorian and becomes his latest experiment to provide his man-cat hybrid named Tygrus with a mate. Batman learns of this and comes to the island to rescue Selina. He is captured and forced into a deadly game of cat-and-flying mouse as Tygrus hunts Batman through the island's jungles.

43 43 "Moon of the Wolf" Dick Sebast Len Wein November 11, 1992 ( ) The Werewolf

and Professor Milo

Batman investigates the appearance of a werewolf-like creature in Gotham, not realizing that the monster happens to be one of Bruce Wayne's associates — Anthony Romulus, ex-Olympic champion. Behind the scheme is twisted chemist Professor Milo. Note: Based on the comic story of the same name by writer Len Wein with art by Neal Adams, from Batman #255, April 1974.

44 44 "Day of the Samurai" Bruce W. Timm Steve Perry February 23, 1993 ( ) Kyodai Ken

Kyodai Ken kidnaps Kari, star pupil of Yoru Sensei, the martial arts instructor who taught both Kyodai and Bruce. The ninja's ransom for her is a scroll that teaches the location of the fabled Death Touch.

45 45 "Terror in the Sky" Boyd Kirkland Story by : Steve Perry and Mark Saraceni

Teleplay by : Mark Saraceni November 12, 1992 ( ) She-Bat

When a giant-sized bat ransacks Gotham harbor, Batman suspects that Dr. Kirk Langstrom is up to his old tricks, taking the Man-Bat formula again. Batman isn't the only one. Kirk's wife, Francine, is so distrustful of her husband that she decides to leave him. After further investigation, Batman discovers that this Man-Bat is not Kirk, but someone else, and thus he shames Francine's father into permanently destroying the formula. Note: Loosely based on "Man-Bat Over Vegas", originally presented in Detective Comics #429, by Frank Robbins. The setting has been shifted from Las Vegas to Gotham Harbor, and in keeping with the family-friendly rating of the television show, She-Bat is not a vampire in the adaptation. The final line of the episode, "the nightmare's finally over", is similar to one of the final lines from the original comic, "Now Fran's vampire nightmare is about over".

The Joker, Killer Croc, the Penguin, Two-Face, and Poison Ivy all meet at a poker table, each telling a tale of times when they almost defeated Batman. At the same time, Harley Quinn is about to kill Catwoman after she rescued Batman from the Joker's electric chair, and Batman must save her. Notes: Influenced by a four-issue story arc in Batman (1977) #291–294, entitled "Where Were You on the Night Batman Was Killed?". In each of the four issues, one of Catwoman, Riddler, and The Joker all recount their claims to have killed the Batman. However, the plot for "Almost Got 'Im" is quite different (six stories in the show, and four completely different ones in the comic book), with only the Joker as an overlapping antagonist.

Two-Face's strategy in "Almost Got 'Im" (strapping down Batman to a giant coin and flipping the coin in the air) was taken from the comic; World's Finest Comics #30, September 1947. In a back-up tale both Batman and Robin were tied to a giant penny that was catapulted onto spikes by a lesser known villain, the Penny Plunderer.

47 47 "Birds of a Feather" Frank Paur Story by : Chuck Menville

Teleplay by : Brynne Stephens February 8, 1993 ( ) The Penguin

Veronica Vreeland is looking for a way to create a splash with her next party, and arrives at the idea of having a former criminal in attendance — especially if there is one whose manners would create a stir. The Penguin, who has recently reformed, fits the bill perfectly. In the process of convincing the Penguin to come to her party, Veronica finds she likes the corpulent little guy. For his part, the Penguin begins to fall in love with her, until he overhears that he is merely being used...

48 48 "What Is Reality?" Dick Sebast Marty Isenberg and Robert N. Skir November 24, 1992 ( ) (weekday)

March 7, 1993 ( ) (primetime) The Riddler

Seeking to prove once and for all that his is the superior mind, the Riddler lures Batman into a riddle-solving contest inside the virtual reality of a computer game in order to save Commissioner Gordon's life. In the course of solving the riddles and escaping the Riddler's traps, Batman learns that he is able to manipulate the virtual reality landscape much like the Riddler does.

49 49 "I Am the Night" Boyd Kirkland Michael Reaves November 9, 1992 ( ) (weekday)

December 13, 1992 ( ) (primetime) The Jazzman

On the anniversary of the death of Bruce's parents, Batman accompanies Leslie Thompkins to Crime Alley to place roses on the spot where they were gunned down. Meanwhile, Commissioner Gordon is on stakeout to arrest Jimmy "The Jazzman" Peake during a drug smuggling ring. Batman had promised to be there, but arrives late to find a gun battle going on. He helps defeat the gangsters and arrest the Jazzman, but at a high cost—Gordon is severely wounded. The incident traumatizes Batman and he contemplates giving up his crime-fighting career, despite the Jazzman escaping prison to carry out his personal vendetta against Gordon (who had sent him to prison six years before).

50 50 "Off Balance" Kevin Altieri Len Wein November 23, 1992 ( ) Count Vertigo and Talia

While following Count Vertigo's trail, Batman encounters Talia, daughter of the head of the Society of Shadows, who was sent by her father to prevent the capture of a sonic drill that the Count stole. But after his identity is mistakenly revealed to Talia, Batman remains off-balance as to where her true loyalties lie. Note: This episode is a direct adaptation of "Into the Den of the Death-Dealers" from Detective Comics #411, May 1971 by Denny O'Neil with art by Bob Brown. The story is famous for the first appearance of the character Talia al Ghul.

51 51 "The Man Who Killed Batman" Bruce W. Timm Paul Dini February 1, 1993 ( ) The Joker, Harley Quinn and Rupert Thorne

When small-time gang member Sidney "The Squid" Debris (played by Matt Frewer) seemingly kills Batman by accident, he gets involved with gangs all over Gotham, as well as the Joker and Rupert Thorne, none of whom believe his story that everything that is happening is by preposterous happenstance.

52 52 "Mudslide" Eric Radomski Story by : Alan Burnett

Teleplay by : Steve Perry September 15, 1993 ( ) Clayface

Clayface is falling apart, literally. His clay-like body is disintegrating. Fortunately, a scientist he knew from his movie star days is working on a remedy. However, Hagen is forced to steal money to pay for the expensive components of the remedy. That is, until one of his targets is Wayne Biomedical Labs...

53 53 "Paging the Crime Doctor" Frank Paur Story by : Mike W. Barr and Laren Bright

Teleplay by : Randy Rogel & Martin Pasko September 17, 1993 ( ) Rupert Thorne

Dr. Matthew Thorne (played by Joseph Campanella), losing his medical license and forced into becoming the crime doctor by his younger brother, crime boss Rupert Thorne, must perform delicate surgery on Rupert. He can't do it alone, and kidnaps Dr. Leslie Thompkins to assist. Batman discovers Leslie's disappearance, and rushes to track her down – and has an additional interest in Matthew, because he was a medical school classmate of Bruce Wayne's father Thomas.

54 54 "Zatanna" Dick Sebast and Dan Riba Paul Dini February 2, 1993 ( ) Montague Kane

When the glamorous magician Zatanna is framed for a robbery during her act, Batman swings to her defense. Zatanna is grateful, though a little puzzled, by the Dark Knight's commitment to prove her innocence, but the two heroes unite and use the skills her father, Zatara, taught them to expose and combat the culprit: an evil illusionist named Montague Kane.

55 55 "The Mechanic" Kevin Altieri Story by : Steve Perry and Laren Bright

Teleplay by : Randy Rogel January 24, 1993 ( ) The Penguin

Thanks to a freak accident during a high-speed chase, the Batmobile is virtually demolished. After Batman takes the car to his personal mechanic, Earl Cooper, the Penguin makes his move and tampers with the Batmobile, putting it under his control. Note: The Penguin's scheme in this episode was similarly featured in Batman Returns.

56 56 "Harley and Ivy" Boyd Kirkland Paul Dini January 18, 1993 ( ) The Joker, Harley Quinn

and Poison Ivy

When the Joker fires Harley, she tries going on a crime spree of her own, joining up with Poison Ivy, and the two become Gotham's Queens of Crime, much to the Joker's fury.

57 57 "Shadow of the Bat: Part 1" Frank Paur Brynne Stephens September 13, 1993 ( ) Two-Face, Rupert Thorne

and Gil Mason

When Commissioner Gordon is framed for taking bribes from Rupert Thorne, his daughter Barbara pleads with Batman to show up at a rally being put on in the commissioner's behalf. But when Batman disappears after finding the person behind the frame-up, Barbara takes the law into her own hands as Batgirl. Note: This episode marks the series' debut appearance of Barbara Gordon as Batgirl.

58 58 "Shadow of the Bat: Part 2" Frank Paur Brynne Stephens September 14, 1993 ( ) Two-Face and Gil Mason

Robin discovers that Gil Mason is in league with the underworld and goes to investigate him. He encounters Batgirl along the way, and go their separate ways to stop Mason. They then meet again to learn that Gil is working with Two-Face to take out Gordon, and have Batman (as Matches Malone) captured.

59 59 "Blind as a Bat" Dan Riba Story by : Mike Underwood and Len Wein

Teleplay by : Len Wein February 22, 1993 ( ) The Penguin

The Penguin steals an experimental helicopter from an air show, causing an explosion that temporarily blinds Bruce Wayne. Batman knows he won't be able to wait until his vision returns to track the Penguin down, and he must find a way to do so without the use of his eyes.

60 60 "The Demon's Quest: Part 1" Kevin Altieri Dennis O'Neil May 3, 1993 ( ) Ra's al Ghul

When Robin is mysteriously abducted from his college campus, Batman begins a fruitless search... until he is astounded by the sudden appearance in the Batcave of Ra's al Ghul. Ra's quickly reveals that his daughter, Talia, has been abducted under circumstances similar to Robin's, suggesting that the same people are responsible. So begins an uneasy truce between Batman and 'The Demon'. Note: A direct adaptation of "Daughter of the Demon" from Batman #232, June 1971, and "The Demon Lives Again" Batman #244, September 1972, both by Denny O'Neil and Neal Adams. Famous for introducing one of Batman's deadlier foes; Ra's al Ghul, father of Talia.

61 61 "The Demon's Quest: Part 2" Kevin Altieri Story by : Dennis O'Neil and Len Wein

Teleplay by : Len Wein May 4, 1993 ( ) Ra's al Ghul

After freeing Talia from her father's clutches and escaping from an avalanche, Batman and Robin follow the only clue they have – the word 'Orpheus'. After discovering that 'Orpheus' is Ra's private satellite that will orbit over the Sahara, the duo travel to the Demon's desert stronghold. There, Batman learns that the satellite is actually a weapon which will explosively destroy all the Lazarus Pits simultaneously throughout the world, destroying all the life that exists. Note: A direct adaptation of "Daughter of the Demon" from Batman #232, June 1971, and "The Demon Lives Again" Batman #244, September 1972, both by Denny O'Neil and Neal Adams.

62 62 "His Silicon Soul" Boyd Kirkland Marty Isenberg and Robert N. Skir November 20, 1992 ( ) H.A.R.D.A.C. and

Duplicate Batman

When a Batman impersonator appears in Gotham City, the real Batman deduces that Karl Rossum is somehow involved and confronts the inventor. The other Batman, a duplicate, then shows up and a battle between the two takes place. After the duplicate Batman escapes, it begins its campaign to recreate H.A.R.D.A.C.'s goals of a robotic society. Note: The anime series The Big O was partially inspired by this episode.

63 63 "Fire from Olympus" Dan Riba Judith & Garfield Reeves-Stevens May 24, 1993 ( ) Maxie Zeus

Believing himself to be the reincarnation of Zeus, Maxie Zeus steals an experimental weapon that the government developed. The mad man desires to use the weapon against the people of Gotham City and Batman must put a stop to Maxie's mad plan against the city he loves.

64 64 "Read My Lips" Boyd Kirkland Story by : Alan Burnett and Michael Reaves

Teleplay by : Joe R. Lansdale May 10, 1993 ( ) The Ventriloquist

A brand-new gang has made its debut committing the slickest crimes ever, thanks to the gang leader, Scarface. It's up to Batman to stop Scarface and his "dummy", the Ventriloquist.

65 65 "The Worry Men" Frank Paur Paul Dini September 16, 1993 ( ) The Mad Hatter