MEPs have revealed they want boys to learn about traditionally ‘female’ activities and should be taught domestic work and care at school.

The Brussels politicians said they want to stand against ‘sexist’ education by encouraging children to take an equal interest in all subjects ‘beyond gendered stereotypes’.

They hope that girls will take up scientific and technical subjects while boys could take up activities such as cleaning the home.

MEPs have revealed they want boys to learn about traditionally ‘female’ activities and should be taught domestic work and care at school

Textbooks showing old-fashioned stereotypes about male and female roles would also be thrown out of schools, under the European Parliament’ proposals.

The suggestions were made in the report on Empowering Girls Through Education from the Parliament’s FEMM Committee on Women’s Rights and Gender Equality, with MEPs approving the proposals by 408 to 236.

The report says it 'encourages girls and boys in the education process to take an equal interest in all subjects, beyond gendered stereotypes, in particular as regards scientific and technical subjects, including boys’ learning about activities regarded as female, in areas such as domestic work and care’.

The Brussels politicians said they want to stand against ‘sexist’ education by encouraging children to take an equal interest in all subjects ‘beyond gendered stereotypes’

Another point says that schools should be guided ‘to embrace a gender perspective and gender equality, and to ensure the elimination of stereotypes and sexist distortions that textbooks and teaching materials may include in their content.'

It added: '[This will then] encourage them also to combat this sexism in literature, film, music, games, media, advertising and other areas that can contribute decisively to changing the attitudes, behaviour and identity of girls and boys’.

Portuguese socialist MEP Liliana Rodrigues, who spearheaded the proposals, said: ‘We are still living in an unequal Europe…women continue to be a prime target for discrimination and violence. I believe that school plays a fundamental role in changing this.

‘[We want to] create a school culture of gender equality, critically oversee the curricula and educational materials, ensure gender equality with regard to personal and professional decisions and improve the percentage of women in positions of responsibility.’

But Leading Labour Eurosceptic MP Kate Hoey told The Daily Express: ‘I have confidence in our nation’s ability to deal with educating our own children. It is time for the EU to stop wasting money on interfering in matters that are none of their business.’