Today I am posting over at Wanda Ann’s blog, Memories By The Mile. You will find me there the 2nd Thursday of every month!

Just a note: This recipe originally appeared as a guest post on Memories by the Mile. I have now posted the recipe here as well for archiving purposes. The recipe is below my original teaser post. Check out Wanda Ann’s site too, she has a ton of great recipes! Enjoy!

Speaking of hot, today I am sharing with you a recipe for Spicy Veggie Quinoa Curry. It is not super-hot, like an August afternoon in southern New Jersey, but it does have a nice little kick to it! Of course, you can dial the spiciness up or down depending on your family’s preferences.

I try to keep it fairly mild for my family, especially for my younger son who seems to be allergic to flavor. Hopefully someday he will outgrow that, but in the meantime I try to not go too crazy with the spices!

Quinoa, of course, is really good for you. If you have not tried it yet, you really should! You can use it like you would use rice, but lots of people also use it in breakfast dishes, like you would oatmeal. It has a slight nutty taste, but the flavor is very mild and so it will take on the flavor of whatever you cook it in.

This recipe is actually vegan, and while not all vegan recipes are good for you, this one really is! You can use this recipe as is and make it a side dish for 4 people or an entree for 2. Or you can double the recipe and serve it as an entree for 4 people.

Spicy Veggie Quinoa Curry Print Recipe Pin Recipe Quick, easy, and healthy quinoa and veggie dish with lots and lots of flavor! Ingredients 1 cup quinoa (rinsed thoroughly)

1 1/4 cups coconut milk

1 cup vegetable broth

3 tablespoons curry paste (more or less, to taste)

1 tablespoon brown sugar

1 tablespoon Sriracha sauce (more or less, to taste)

1 teaspoon vegetable oil

1 tablespoon minced garlic

1 cup diced bell pepper (use different colored peppers for colorful presentation!)

1 cup diced onion

1 cup diced broccoli and/or cauliflower

1 handful fresh spinach Instructions Mix together the quinoa, coconut milk, vegetable broth, curry paste, brown sugar, and Sriracha sauce in a pot over medium high heat. Bring to a boil, then reduce heat to low and cover. Simmer about 15 - 20 minutes until all liquid is absorbed and quinoa is tender but not mushy.

Heat the vegetable oil over medium heat, then add the garlic, pepper, onion, and broccoli/cauliflower. Saute until vegetable begin to soften.

When the veggies are almost done, add the spinach and stir until wilted.

Combine the quinoa with the veggies and serve. Notes Recipe adapted from Vegangela.com Nutrition Calories: 370 kcal | Carbohydrates: 42 g | Protein: 9 g | Fat: 19 g | Saturated Fat: 14 g | Sodium: 344 mg | Potassium: 603 mg | Fiber: 5 g | Sugar: 7 g | Vitamin A: 64.6 % | Vitamin C: 91.5 % | Calcium: 7.5 % | Iron: 27.6 %

Click here to head on over to Memories by the Mile get the full post, and while you are there, check out some of the other awesome posts on Wanda Ann’s blog!

Recipe adapted from Vegangela.com.

This post contains affiliate links. Check out our full disclosure here