In 1996, Kielhurn was arrested after she was found with 25kilos of cocaine,

A Florida woman has been arrested after hitting her lesbian partner in the face with a dildo.

Annette Kielhurn of St. Petersburg was in the presence of a police officer when during an argument with Gamze Capaner-Ridley she pulled out the sex toy and slapped her in the face.

This arrest comes almost 20 years after Kielhurn was sent to prison for three years after being found passed out and drunk in a car that contained 25kilos of cocaine in the backseat - which had a street value of $2.5million.

Annette Kielhurn (above, right in mugshot from June arrest for trespassing) of St. Petersburg, Florida was charged with domestic battery on Saturday after she hit her partner in the face with a dildo

The Smoking Gun obtained a copy of the police report which says that Capaner-Ridley, 57, had filed for a civil domestic violence injunction on Friday, and on Saturday an officer accompanied her as she removed some personal belongings.

Things started to get heated between the women when Kielhurn, 57, objected to a dress that Capaner-Ridley planned to take with her.

That is when, according to the police report, 'the defendant intentionally shoved a dildo in the victim’s face and grabbed her right arm while arguing whose it belonged to.'

At that point, Kielhurn was arrested and charged with domestic battery.

It was also noted that Capaner-Ridley had asked the defendant several times not to touch her.

Kielhurn was booked on a misdemeanor and released on $500 bail.

She also has a court case pending after she was arrested for trespassing last month.

Kielhurn is a former New York State corrections officer who also owned a cleaning company in Long Island before being arrested in 1996.

She was in North Carolina when an officer found her passed out and drunk in the driver's seat of her rental car.

The officer asked to search her vehicle and she agreed, at which point a suitcase was discovered in the trunk with a large quantity of cocaine.

A breathalyzer administered by the officer registered a blood-alcohol level of 0.18 percent.