Alumni Legacy Scholarship

The school we all know today as Eastern Michigan University has had many names over its history, and so have the students who’ve attended. Normalites, Hurons, and Eagles have gathered over the years to share in the traditions and rich history of EMU. Traditions not only pass through each graduating class, but strengthened through numerous generations – continuing a family legacy. Do you have relatives who have graduated from EMU? If so, you are in luck, in 1970, a scholarship was established to honor the children and grandchildren of EMU alumni.

This scholarship helps many students who are currently enrolled at EMU, and those who have already come and gone through the campus know what a great experience EMU can be. The school is always looking for almuni to keep the traditional alive by donating to the Alumni legacy scholarship fund.

Eligible recipients can be awarded $1,250 per academic year and the reward is renewable based upon class level, degree program, and successful completion of other eligibility requirements. Awards are renewable for up to four consecutive years. That’s a cool 5k!

Application Guidelines

So your granddad loves to tell stories of his time here and now you’re interested in the money up for grabs. What do you need to know?

Be accepted as a Freshman, Sophmore or transfer student Submit a fully completed application. Provide official transcripts reflecting at least a 3.2 grade point average. Entering freshman, please provide official high school transcripts that include ACT/SAT scores and a cumulative grade point average. If you have already been admitted to EMU, your transcripts will be pulled through the Admissions Office. Entering sophomores and transfer students should provide official college transcripts. A written letter of recommendation. (not from a family member, they’ve already helped enough with this particular scholarship) An essay (500 words or less), describing what it means to you to be an EMU Legacy. Resume outlining work, school, extracurricular activities, and volunteer experience.

Additionally, all applicants must be sponsored by a parent or grandparent who is an Eastern Michigan University alum. Demonstration of financial need is not a requirement for this scholarship. The Office for Alumni Relations must receive all applications, complete and ready for review, by the posted deadline of May 1, 2015 at 5 p.m.

View Alumni Scholarship Scoring Rubric

Renewal Criteria

So if you’ve earned it, how do you keep it?

In order to remain eligible for the Alumni Association Legacy Scholarship, all recipients must:

Earn and maintain a 3.2 grade point average Participate in at least 3 service hours at alumni events and other activities sponsored by the Office for Alumni Relations per semester Enroll as a full-time students for every semester (fall and winter) this scholarship is received. That 12 credit hours.

After you apply, winners are announced in July 2015. That’s right around the corner, so get to it! The deadline is May 1st. Follow this link to the application. Good luck!