Oct 9, 2016; Washington, DC, USA; Washington Nationals relief pitcher Mark Melancon (43) celebrates after their win against the Los Angeles Dodgers during game two of the 2016 NLDS playoff baseball series at Nationals Park. The Washington Nationals won 5-2.Mandatory Credit: Brad Mills-USA TODAY Sports

The San Francisco Giants and closer Mark Melancon met last week to talk about possibly working out a deal this off-season. Melancon spoke with MLB Network Radio today to discuss the meeting.

Melancon spoke highly of the San francisco Giants organization, and the meeting. He also mentioned that this will be a hard decision. San Francisco certainly has a pitcher friendly ballpark and the Giants also have the commitment to winning that any pitcher would appreciate.

One thing that gets lost with fans, however, is how hard it is for families to uproot and move from city to city. Deciding where to spend the next few years of your life is never an easy choice.

Melancon on #SFGiants meeting: “It was an opportunity to meet & get to know people a little bit in 24 hours, organization speaks for itself” — MLB Network Radio (@MLBNetworkRadio) November 16, 2016

Melancon on choosing a team: “Ultimately I will weigh out by options and figure out what’s best for my family. It’s a tough decision.” #MLB — Casey Stern (@CaseyStern) November 16, 2016

Melancon also spoke about the Pittsburgh Pirates, where he had spent his entire MLB career before being traded in July to Washington. As Melancon and others explore their options in free agency, it is clear that a team that can spend to keep a roster together will play a key role. Pittsburgh’s lack of financial commitment to building on what they had started was clearly frustrating for the former Pirate.

Mark Melancon on #Pirates : “You look back and know we were doing something right. If we just could’ve added one or two more pieces” #MLB — Casey Stern (@CaseyStern) November 16, 2016

Earlier in the off-season, the Giants were clear that they planned on signing one of the big three closers available. Jon Morosi of MLB Network reported earlier in the week that the Giants have already spoken to representatives for Aroldis Chapman, Kenley Jansen and Melancon. One factor that makes Chapman and Melancon more attractive on the free agent market than Jansen is there is no draft pick compensation attached to his signing.

Because both were traded during the season, their previous teams will not receive a first round pick in the June draft if they lose them. Jansen, however, would cost the Giants a first round pick. All of these factors are being weighed right now by general manager Bobby Evans and the front office. The one thing that has become clear is that Mark Melancon was impressed with San Francisco and will be in consideration for his services.

Be sure to check back every day for the latest Hot Stove news about the San Francisco Giants from Around the Foghorn.