Genre

Action, Platformer

Action, Platformer Platform

PC, PS3, X360

PC, PS3, X360 Release date

Jun 14, 2011 (US)

Jun 16, 2011 (EU)

This game was released on June 16, 2011 and is no longer available to pre-order. Any incentives that were offered are listed below.

Alice: Madness Returns is an upcoming multiplatform action-adventure game from Spicy Horse studio with game designer American McGee. It will be released in June this year for PC, Mac, Xbox 360 and Playstation 3 platforms.

The sequel picks up 11 years after the events of the first game. Alice is living in the gloomy Victorian London, still haunted by nightmarish hallucinations that interfere with reality. She seeks refuge in the Wonderland, but finds it warped by her own insanity. If Alice is to save herself from the madness, she has to use her Vorpal Blade and an array of other crazy weapons to defeat twisted enemies and recall the repressed memories of her past.

Pre-order bonuses

The first A: MR preorder bonus is available for gamers on EA Store only. Those who reserve a copy of Alice: Madness Returns – The Complete Collection will receive both the sequel and the re-mastered original game, American McGee’s Alice, as digital download.

The second bonus is available on Amazon, GameStop, and the aforementioned EA Store. Gamers who pre-order Alice: Madness Returns at any of these retailers will receive 9 songs from the official soundtrack composed by the former Nine Inch Nails drummer Chris Vrenna.

Finally, a free Alice: Madness Returns Interactive Storybook app is available for download on iTunes. Complete it on your iPhone, iPod or iPad (anything that runs iOS 4.0 and above) and unlock a $10 discount for the upcoming game at EA Store! The story book serves as a prequel to A:MR and features some impressive artwork.

Beautiful Insanity trailer

The fourth trailer for A: MR features some gameplay footage, including fantastic environments and battle scenes with interesting new weapons.

Want to find out more? Visit EA.com/Alice for official news, trailers, screenshots and other info.