Over the last two years, the media has gone wild with accusations at the Trump Family, the most recent of which is that the President’s son Eric moved millions of dollars from St. Jude’s Children Hospital to his own personal business. The First Son denied the rumor and the charity has praised him for raising millions for sick children.

Forbes reported that Eric’s charitable golf outing gave more than $500,000 in payments to the Trump Organization from 2012 to 2014, though there was no itemized list of expenses. Meaning the author who wrote the article could not deduce the cost for individual items like staff, alcohol, travel, food, and/or entertainment which would not have benefitted the Trumps.

“It is unclear from these tax forms how much of those payments went to the Trump Organization,” ABC News admitted.

A pair of anonymous sources with alleged knowledge to the charity event were the backbone of the author’s claim and insisted that it was Donald who demanded the charity be billed for holding events on the Trump golf courses.

Meaning any accusation that Eric, the President, or their company directly profited from the charity is baseless. Once again, the media is using anonymous sources to defame the President’s name and his son’s work to help sick children.

St. Jude’s President and CEO Richard Shadyac Jr. released a statement back in December 2016 praising Eric’s charitable work, which included more than $3.6 million in donations that year.With his help, they raised $16.3 million as of December 31, 2016 as part of his $20 million pledge to the charity.

“We recognize and appreciate that, in addition to this pledge, ETF (Eric Trump Foundation) contributions and fundraising efforts prior to the $20,000,000 pledge have helped to raise collectively over $16.3 million dollars for the children of St. Jude over the last ten years,” Shadyac Jr. said.

According to Eric Trump, his expense ratio was 12.3% between 2007-2015 collectively, meaning he dropped nearly 88% to the bottom line.

The only actual evidence is that Eric Trump has worked to raise tens-of-millions of dollars for sick children. Rumors that he and his family profited from them have not been substantiated and are based on rumors and conspiracy theories.

Latest Videos