Note that, as a backer, your credit card will only be billed if/when Identity reaches its Kickstarter campaign goal.

Identity is a modern-day open-world MMORPG for PC and Mac with complete freedom to do almost anything you can imagine at any time in first or third person views. Live as an honest civilian, a criminal, police officer, paramedic and many more. There are no levels or skill grinding, but talent and perk progression so that it’s the actions of you, not your character, which matter most.

An enormous online and persistent world controlled in almost every aspect by the players living within it.

Player-driven gameplay and economy with dozens of jobs and epic careers.

Action and fun around every corner with a player police force, gangs, cartels, businesses and more.

More casual games than we can list, from karaoke and cinemas to paintball matches and more.

Play on the official servers or host your own with your own rules and options.

No subscription fees and never pay-to-win.

Identity has been under development by only a few people and only for a few months. In that time we've gone far and done things that have never been seen in a video game before; Identity is already revolutionary, and we're excited to see how far we can take the technology and gameplay when we have the support of you as a backer!

While Identity is a very ambitious project, it's right up John's alley in terms of systems and design. Two of John's past and current game projects, Mortal Online and Altis Life, together have already overcome many of the technical hurdles Identity's development faces.

Mortal Online was the first MMORPG created on the Unreal Engine and Identity's Unreal Engine 4 is ten years further developed still. Asylum's Altis Life is the most popular game and server-set of its kind in the world, and acts as the inspiration for Identity.

For years now, MMORPGs have lost their way. What was once a genre about exploring and living in a new world has now become a treadmill to keep you playing the same game over and over again. Identity is changing things.

Gone are all artificial restrictions keeping you away from the content you want to play! Instead of levels and character skills dictating what you can do, Identity focuses on your actions and building a character around what you find fun. Jump into the world and start making a name for yourself in any way you choose.

As a citizen you can start a business, join gangs and control territory, own real estate or even become governor and set your own laws. With minimal AI, it’s you players who control every aspect of society including law enforcement.

While a game with fun being the top priority, many elements like weapons, health and vehicles function with exceptionally high realism and fidelity.

Identity is all about fun, freedom, social interaction and so much to do that you’re never left bored.

It's still early for Identity, but we have quite a bit to talk about already and we'll be giving more details on new epic features regularly!

A massive, dynamic world

The world in Identity is huge with all sorts of landscapes from large busy cities to small rural towns, farms, forests and more. Set in a fictional region of the United States, you'll find enough variety that there's almost always something new to see.

The environment will be changing often as gangs capture territories, real estate is bought up and crops are grown.

VOIP communication

Why are other MMORPGs still using old technologies? While the option to communicate by text will always be there, Identity brings voice-over-IP (Internet) technology to the forefront, allowing you to speak as your character. Anything you say will come from your character in the game world, complete with moving mouth and lips.

That's only the beginning, too! With this you'll find working telephones, radios, megaphones, microphones and more. Communication should be fun!

Vehicles and transportation

With such a huge world to live in, you'll need all sorts of vehicles to get around quickly and safely!

Vehicles range from common and inexpensive, such as a bicycle, to supercars and luxury yachts for those of you building your empires.

All vehicles are being made with painstakingly realistic physics and high fidelity.

Many vehicles can be considered an investment, too! A large transport truck can earn its value back by running goods, so long as you don't run into bandits. Most vehicles have trunk space to fill up with equipment, resources, drugs, and so on.

Guns and other weapons

Like vehicles, weapons in Identity are made to feel and function as close to their real-world counterparts as possible, as is the damage they deal!

Firearms aren't easy to come by as a civilian and high-powered rifles are incredibly rare as they require you meet an arms dealer who knows their stuff.

Weapons aren't limited to guns, either. You'll find knives, bats, or even boxing gloves!

Own a piece of the world

Every home in the world can be purchased by a player, and apartment buildings can house hundreds of people. A house in the world is unique, and can only have one owner at any given time, while an apartment is always available to those with the cash! Houses and apartments can range from a small studio to a massive penthouse.

New homes are empty and it's up to you to fill it with furniture from stores or crafted by players. Furniture includes useful tools like a television or computer, or something to add a little flair for the party you plan on throwing.

Designers can create furniture in thousands of style combinations making something suited to tastes, or even paint on a canvas to sell or hang on your walls.

Do you want a job or do you want a career?

You'll find dozens of jobs as you travel the land. There's never a shortage of work for those willing to put in the effort! Unlike a career, jobs are small tasks that can be completed to earn some cash and they're always available (but not always legal). Examples of jobs include harvesting, fishing, hunting, and so on.

Careers are much more in-depth. Work as a police officer, a firefighter, a freight runner and more. Each career has its own character progression branches and often ranking and specialities as well.

For example, imagine a group of friends has just robbed a small store in your town and they got away before police arrived. As a cop who made it to the detective ranks, it could be up to you to find fingerprints or other evidence.

We all have to make a living, somehow

With risk, comes reward. If you can manage to pull off a heist and get away with it, you could find yourself with a lot of quick cash. The problem with crime is that there are those who want to keep the streets clean. Once you're wanted, it might be a matter of time before you find yourself behind bars!

The skilled might also find some easy money at the casino or by playing the lottery.

Frequent micro updates

Because Identity is an MMORPG, albeit not much like any other, we're going to be continuously updating the game with new content and features years after release.

Since our focus is on improving the game and not making money off big expansions, we're instead going to be releasing updates at a very fast and steady pace. You'll be getting new toys and fixes nearly every single week so that you've always got something new to look forward to!

We can't do this without you. Every backer brings us closer to not only making Identity a reality in the near future, but to expand beyond our current scope and make something awesome even better. But, we can't do this without you!