One of the greatest mysteries of life is facing the enigma and mystery of death. Ever wonder what your last moments will be like? No one can be sure what they’ll meet in the afterlife, but those final moments are usually filled with somber thoughts and honesty. While not all of us have the luxury or the chance to prepare for death, our final words may be extremely revealing and give a truthful glimpse into our last thoughts and feelings that often reflect on the experience we’ve had throughout life. Last words and quotes from loved ones are always treasured, as it is the last memory that will ever be created by the dying person. Here is a list of the most epic and famous last words (in no particular order).

George Harrison (1943 – 2001) ”Love one another”

Lead guitarist of The Beatles has made many strides in history and revolutionizing rock ‘n’ roll music. His musical inspirations have been credited to Hinduism and traces of Indian culture during the mid-1960s. Many Beatles hit singles like “Here Comes the Sun” and “While My Guitar Gently Weeps” have exposed the style of sitar melodies and rhythms to mainstream Western music. Always known for his quiet and somber demeanor, Harrison’s last words, “Love one another” reflect many messages from Beatles songs and also reflect how he lived and his philosophies as a person. Battling throat cancer he finally passed away on Nov. 29, 2001 and his last words were recorded by his beloved wife.

Bob Marley (1945 – 1981) ”Money can’t buy life”

Bob Marley was undoubtedly one of the leading songwriters, singers, and guitarists of our time. Who can forget his peaceful philosophy and carefree lyrics that spread Jamaican culture and music to a worldwide audience? He sustained a form of malignant melanoma called acral lentiginous and died at the age of 36. After declining amputation of his toe, the melanoma eventually spread to his lungs and brain, leading to his unfortunate death. The world mourned the loss of a musical genius. Marley’s last words to his son Ziggy were “Money can’t buy life.”

Steve Irwin (1962 – 2006) ”Don’t worry, they usually don’t swim backwards”

This was the last recorded statement from an iconic Australian television personality, wildlife expert, and conservationist known as the Crocodile Hunter. Steve was filming in shallow waters for his daughter’s new show, Bindi the Jungle Girl, when a sting Ray pierced his chest, causing fatal internal damage to his arteries. Steve’s last moments were recorded on tape, and confirm that the stingray was swimming backwards, which adds to the sad irony in his death.

Malcolm X (1925 – 1965) ”Brothers! Brothers, please! This is a house of peace!”

Malcolm X, one of our greatest human rights activists, has been described as one of the most influential public speakers in history. He was assassinated while giving a speech about unity and equal rights at Manhattan’s Audubon Ballroom. Before he was shot, a disturbance broke out among the crowd of 400 people. Malcolm’s bodyguards moved from his side to tend to the fight that broke out, and a man rushed forward and shot Malcolm directly in the chest with a sawed off shotgun. As if that was not enough, two other men had handguns, and altogether, Malcolm was hit 17 times before his body struck the floor. In his last moments, he was still trying to subdue the crowd and keep peace in his heart. Other sources describe his finals words as “Now, now, brothers, break it up, be cool, be calm.”

Jack Daniel (1846 – 1911) ”One last drink, please”

We’ve seen his bottles of Tennessee whiskey in liquor stores. Fittingly, Jack Daniel’s last words continue to inspire merry spirits and world famous whiskey to be poured. In 1907, due to his failing health, Daniel gave his distillery to his favorite nephew, Lem Motlow, who then passed it down to his children. Jack died from blood poisoning that he sustained from an infection that started in his big toe, a result of kicking a safe in. His last words, “one last drink please,” have inspired a marketing frenzy used primarily on the London Underground transit system in January 2006. His legacy will indeed live on, as Jack Daniels Whiskey is one of the world’s best selling liquors today.