Supporters of President Donald Trump are calling on authorities to investigate violence against them under state civil rights laws, after clashes erupted over the weekend at pro-Trump rallies in Hollywood and Huntington Beach.

“They threw bottles at us,” Matthew Woods, a Hollywood protest organizer, said Thursday. “We were surprised at the violence directed against us … and we’re not going to take it anymore.”

Woods claimed some of the Trump supporters were victims of hate crimes when they were confronted by angry counter-protesters Saturday on Hollywood Boulevard and at Bolsa Chica State Beach in Huntington Beach.

The rallies coincided with a series of nationwide “Make America Great Again” — or MAGA — marches in support of the Trump administration.

But the California events turned ugly.

In Orange County, what was dubbed as a family friendly gathering, devolved into a violent brawl between marchers and counter-protesters for about 30 minutes.

• RELATED STORY: Fight breaks out at Pro-Trump Hollywood MAGA rally; 2 arrested

Videos have since surfaced of angry counter-protesters punching and cursing at marchers, leaving those who were assaulted asking why police didn’t step in to stop to the violence.

Authorities charged three males with felony illegal use of pepper spray and one woman with misdemeanor assault and battery.

Meanwhile in Hollywood, as Trump supporters marched from the Pantages Theatre to the president’s star on the Walk of Fame, they were met by counter-protesters shouting anti-Trump expletives. The event never fully descended into chaos, but it had its moments, including a fist fight that broke out on the sidewalk when a man grabbed a Trump supporter’s hat. Woods said someone also spat on a woman during the march.

Los Angeles police officers on bicycles detained two men for possible assault after the fist fight. It was unclear if they were charged.

Ahead of a news conference Thursday in Hollywood, Woods called on the district attorneys in Orange and Los Angeles counties to enforce the Ralph Civil Rights Act and the Bane Civil Rights Act, which “protects people from continued violence or the threat of violence based on grounds such as race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, political affiliation, sex, sexual orientation, age, disability or position in a labor dispute,” according to state law.

• RELATED STORY: Trump march in Huntington Beach turned into 30-minute violent brawl with ‘a lot of people punching’

The Los Angeles Police Department defines a hate crime as “any criminal act or attempted criminal act directed against a person or persons based on the victim’s actual or perceived race, nationality, religion, sexual orientation, disability or gender.”

Woods praised the LAPD for preventing the Hollywood march from getting out of control.

While he welcomed the debate in a nation divided under Trump’s presidency, he said some counter-protesters went too far, and the Trump supporters were victims.

“Anyone can be subject to a hate crime,” he said.