It has been a major recruiting weekend for Oklahoma with the 2016 class, but the Sooners have added one more piece to their 2015 puzzle.

Junior college wide receiver Jarvis Baxter confirmed Friday night he is going to be a walk-on at OU with hopes of earning a scholarship either during the season or next semester.

Baxter, who is 5-foot-11, was ranked No. 43 in the Scout juco 100 last season and had signed with South Florida. He was released from his letter of intent with USF two weeks ago when it became clear he was not going to qualify academically.

Baxter, however, will make OU’s requirements and said he is going to report to Norman on Tuesday with everybody else.

Baxter said USF only allows someone to use nine credit hours in the summer to meet the required GPA. Baxter took more than nine hours but those extra hours couldn’t count for USF but do count for OU. OU allows for more than nine hours in the summer, which is what Baxter needed to reach the required GPA.

Baxter was a star at Trinity Valley where he played against fellow OU juco transfer Dede Westbrook. That’s where it all started. Once Baxter talked with Westbrook, Baxter called offensive coordinator Lincoln Riley about joining OU.

“I talked with him, and he said they have a walk-on spot at wide receiver open,” Baxter said. “I talked to my family about it and decided this would be the best thing for me to do.

“I’m going to have a chance to earn it during the season. Pretty sure I’ll end up with that scholarship because nobody is going to work harder than me.”

Baxter visited OU initially for the 2011 OU-Texas A&M game. He remembers it well and said OU has been his dream school ever since.

“I got an autograph from Corey Nelson,” Baxter said. “I talked with Jamell Fleming. I wanted to get his gloves, but he said he couldn’t do that.”

In the last week Baxter has started to receive full scholarship offers from other schools, but in the end, decided OU was the place to be.

“Because of the institution,” Baxter said. “The kind of school OU is. It’s a great community, and I can get a great education.”

Baxter said he is a 3-for-2 kid with three years to play two seasons’ worth of eligibility.