Police have arrested a Franklin man for allegedly groping and fondling women when he was supposed to be giving them massages.

Ryan Farmer, 24, is facing three counts of misdemeanor battery.

Investigators say the allegations involve three women who have never met, but shared similar stories of what they say happened at CMG Family Wellness.

According to the charging documents, the first allegation came from an 18-year-old woman this past March. That woman told investigators her massage with Farmer started out fine, but in the last 15 minutes "things became uncomfortable."

That's when she says Farmer fondled her breast for several minutes. The woman told police she didn't stop Farmer because it was her first massage and she didn't know if this was something normally done.

When the massage was over, the woman says Farmer told her, "This stays between you and I."

The second alleged victim came forward in May, saying she had had other massages with Farmer in the past that went fine.

This time, though, at the end of the session, the woman says Farmer groped her breasts and that "the touching of her breasts seemed sexual, not at all like he touched her back, neck, shoulder, etc."

That woman says she didn't speak up fearing Farmer would "do something to hurt her."

The third woman, according to court documents, had an appointment right after the second alleged victim. She told investigators Farmer groped her breasts. Court documents show the woman told investigators "that what Ryan was doing seemed like foreplay."

CMG Family Wellness issued the following statement to Eyewitness News Wednesday afternoon:

Farmer had worked at our center as a massage therapist for approximately a year. He is no longer employed at CMG Family Wellness Center and we have fully cooperated with the police investigation. CMG Family Wellness is dedicated to the health and well being of our patients and clients. We diligently check references of our employees. We make certain they have the required training and licensing. We also hold them to the highest professional standards. We are devastated to learn of these allegations but remain committed to serving the healthcare needs of our community, patients and clients. We will not have any further comment on the matter.

Farmer has denied the allegations and is out of jail on $750 bond.