Good aim is essential to having fun and improving your results in CoD.

I have seen this question asked numerous times “How do I get a better aim in Call of Duty” and today we are going to go over exactly that. This will be very in-depth and we will go through every aspect in order for you to be the best you can be. However, there’s a common misconception that things will change overnight although that is not the case, these things take time and if you’re willing to put in the time then great things will happen to your gameplay and you will notice drastic improvements.

Vibration – Good Or Bad?

By default on Call of Duty, your controller is set to vibrate when you shoot and get shot. This adds a whole element to the game as it allows you to virtually feel everything your character does. However, because you get so used to it you are unable to play without it.

If you are using vibration, I would recommend turning it off immediately because the rumble from the vibrations will throw your shot off and make it harder to control your aim. It is only a minor change but it can make all the difference to your game and elevate it to that next level.

Addons – Kontrol Freeks

If you haven’t heard of Kontrol Freeks already, they are an extension that sits on top of your analogue sticks. You may now be asking yourself “Why would I want this?” Well, they are much taller than regular analogue sticks, it means you don’t need to move your thumbs as much whilst aiming. This will allow you to make much more precise movements, thus making it easier to play on higher sensitivities, although not many professional players do play at a higher sensitivity, however, we will get onto that topic shortly.

They are used by a lot of professional Call of Duty players.They are one of the most notorious companies when it comes to the gaming accessory industry and has a great reputation. Not only is the quality of the product exceptional, but also because they are considerably cheap. A pair of Kontrol Freeks will only cost you a mere $10-20 so they are definitely worth trying out. The best part is, if you don’t like them, they have a 30-day money back guarantee, so there is no risk to be had.

Sensitivity Levels – Very Controversial

There is no such thing as a ‘best sensitivity level’ at all. Some players play on 3, others play on 15, it’s all about what makes you feel comfortable and if you feel comfortable then it doesn’t matter at all. However, I cannot stress how important it is to find what is the best sensitivity level for yourself. If you play on a level that you don’t feel comfortable, no matter what tips and tricks you’re told, you will NOT be accurate.

Where should I aim?

Where else would you aim? At enemies, that’s the answer the majority of us would give, however, it really does matter where you shoot at your enemy because that will be the decider of winning gunfights with players at the same level of competition as yourself.Some of you may say aim for the head, now if you have the best aim in Call of Duty then, by all means, go for it, but for the majority of us, we will struggle to connect our shots particularly with SMG’s.If you aim for the head each time you fire at the enemy, it is likely you will miss your first shots, if they are returning shots, more than likely you are dead already. Also, if they hit you when you are aiming at their head, your gun will flinch and your aim will lift upwards.To conclude this, I would highly recommend aiming at the torso for all gunfights as it’s much easier to hit your targets, kills enemies faster than shooting at legs and if you flinch you’ll more than likely hit their head as a result of doing so.

Some of you may say aim for the head, now if you have the best aim in Call of Duty then, by all means, go for it, but for the majority of us, we will struggle to connect our shots particularly with SMG’s. If you aim for the head each time you fire at the enemy, it is likely you will miss your first shots, if they are returning shots, more than likely you are dead already. Also, if they hit you when you are aiming at their head, your gun will flinch and your aim will lift upwards.To conclude this, I would highly recommend aiming at the torso for all gunfights as it’s much easier to hit your targets, kills enemies faster than shooting at legs and if you flinch you’ll more than likely hit their head as a result of doing so. To conclude this, I would highly recommend aiming at the torso for all gunfights as it’s much easier to hit your targets, kills enemies faster than shooting at legs and if you flinch you’ll more than likely hit their head as a result of doing so.

Are there attachments that will help me with my aim?

There is, most certainly. Depending on which Call of Duty you play, there are different names for this specific attachment. I will go through what they are mostly known as and you’ll get the general gist.

Attachment – Foregrip

There is one you really need to have equipped which is the grip attachment, more known as the foregrip. I am sure you’ll know the effects of this attachment, if not this attachment reduces recoil and it used by almost 80% of players. This attachment is particularly useful with SMG’s and Assault Rifles which is good for striving competitors as this is what you will use most. These weapons tend to have a lot of recoil but with having the attachment it will be able to leverage it, making it a lot easier to aim.

Is it worth purchasing an upgraded controller?

If you do not play claw, which is the art of holding your controller differently so you don’t need to use your fingers as much then yes, you will be left behind using the standard controller. All the best players play claw or have some sort of modification on their controller with the exception of one professional Call of Duty player Matthew “Skrapz” Marshall. Now you may be wondering if these controllers are legal in a competitive setting, the majority of them are legal, however, you can purchase ones that are illegal which have rapid fire mods installed. The best websites to purchase legal controllers from is Scuf Gaming and

Now you may be wondering if these controllers are legal in a competitive setting, the majority of them are legal, however, you can purchase ones that are illegal which have rapid fire mods installed. The best websites to purchase legal controllers from is Scuf Gaming and SharQ. The good thing about these modded controllers is you can build them from scratch, everything from what buttons the paddles are assigned to and what decal you have on your controller.There is one downside, they are expensive but they really are considerably more fun to play with and will really improve all aspects of your game. There is one downside, they are expensive but they really are considerably more fun to play with and will really improve all aspects of your game.

There is one downside, they are expensive but they really are considerably more fun to play with and will really improve all aspects of your game. SharQ is the cheaper of the two, seem to have better customer support and are more reliable. If you were going to buy one, I would highly recommend SharQ.

Final Tip – Become a harder target!

Once you apply all these tips in this article I have written, you will see drastic improvements. However, you will also notice you will concentrate on your accuracy too much and this will cause you to be static and not moving much during the gunfight. The easiest opponents to take out are the ones standing still, the same applies to you.

This is where I shall introduce you to the art of ‘strafing’. Strafing is when you aim down sights, you move side to side in order to become a harder target to hit. With the attachment stock, you will be able to strafe faster making it incredibly difficult to hit, as long as you can control it. You can make the argument it would make it harder for you to hit your shots, but this is not the case. As I said, as long as you can control it, it will prove to be very beneficial.

Summary

To conclude this article, we will just go over main points. There will also be a link to my Twitter, my organisations Twitter and a link to SharQ controllers at the end.

Turn controller vibration off

Controller attachments

How to find the right sensitivity level for you

Where to aim when shooting

Attachments to help

Thank you for reading my article, any constructive criticism is very welcome!

My Twitter – http://www.twitter.com/Beluzahh

Organisations Twitter – http://www.twitter.com/LazyLagGaming

SharQ Controllers – https://sharqcontrollers.com/

Advertisements