Netflix has selected its next original series. The streamer announced Monday that it has ordered a psychological thriller from the creators of Damages.



The 13-episode run, produced by Sony Pictures Television, hails from Todd A. Kessler, Daniel Zelman and Glenn Kessler (KZK). It joins House of Cards, Orange Is the New Black, Hemlock Grove and the rebooted Arrested Development on Netflix's growing roster of originals.



Still untitled, the series focuses on a family of adult siblings whose secrets and scars come to light with the return of their black sheep brother.



"We were spellbound after hearing Todd, Glenn and Daniel's pitch and knew Netflix was the perfect home for this suspenseful family drama that is going to have viewers on the edge of their seats," said Netflix original content vp Cindy Holland. "Their work on Damages was truly ahead of its time and we're proud to be bringing our viewers this upcoming series."



PHOTOS: Exclusive Portraits of Netflix's Stars

Netflix began its rollout of original programming earlier in 2013. The Emmy-winning House of Cards scored a two-season order off the bat, while subsequent efforts Hemlock Grove and Orange Is the New Black earned renewals after their respective premieres. Arrested Development, revived at Netflix for a fourth season years after its conclusion on Fox, was only ordered for its recent summer run -- though both creator Mitch Hurwitz and Netflix chief content officer Ted Sarandos have spoken optimistically about doing more.

"We are absolutely thrilled to be creating an original series for Netflix -- a company committed to cutting-edge storytelling in a vibrant, new space," said the trio of co-creators in a joint statement. "We're equally excited about our relationship with Sony Pictures TV, which continues to provide us with unwavering creative support. We've always wanted to put our spin on a family saga and examine universal themes of family in a way that has never been seen before on television. The series is a tightly wound thriller that explores the complex bonds between parents and children, brothers and sisters, and the rivalries, jealousies, and betrayals at the core of every family."



"The guys worked so hard to come up with the right idea after the success of Damages," added Sony TV president of programming and production Jamie Erlicht. "It took almost a year to fully develop the pitch, and their patience paid off with the incredible reaction in the community, especially at Netflix, the perfect home for this show."



Damages, which launched on FX in 2007 and aired three seasons there before moving to DirecTV for its final two, was a critical smash -- despite relatively low ratings after its inaugural run. It earned 20 Emmy nominations over the course of five seasons, including two lead drama actress wins for star Glenn Close.



The news series is set to begin production in early 2014.