Justise Winslow didn't need to be told Thursday how much of a difference a year can make.

"It's kind of surreal to think that it was exactly a year to the day," Winslow said Thursday as he addressed the Heat's youth basketball camp at South Broward High School.

Last June, Winslow was a leading NBA draft prospect out of Duke who would take an unexpected dip to the Miami Heat at No. 10. A year later, he was back in South Florida after yet another flight from the scene of the draft in New York, this time after mentoring this year's leading prospects.

"I just told them to be open to everything and don't be closed-minded -- and be on time," Winslow said with a laugh.

For Winslow, the whirlwind of draft night a year ago involved disappointment, elation and ultimately a path that would set him on course for second-team NBA All-Rookie, the Heat's first such selection since 2009.

Thursday afternoon, in addition to confirming he would participate in summer league with the Heat and revealing he already has begun work on adjusting the mechanics on his jump shot, he reflected on his draft-day fall and rise a year ago.

"It was an exciting day, probably the most nervous I've ever been in my life," he said. "But it was fun. I had my whole family there, sitting there. But I really didn't know where I was going to go. I thought I was going to go higher. But it ended getting to the eighth pick. I knew I wasn't going to Detroit [which selected Arizona forward Stanley Johnson]. Then the ninth pick was Charlotte and they passed on me [in favor of Wisconsin forward Frank Kaminsky].

"And so then I remember my agent and my whole agency team jumping up and telling me I'm a lucky guy because I'm going to Miami. So I kind of knew before they actually announced it on the stage. But just walking across the stage and knowing that I was living a dream going to the NBA was very exciting. I just couldn't stop shaking. I was smiling so hard."

Heat forward Justise Winslow named one of 15 players on U.S. National Select Team, to train in Las Vegas in July with Olympic team. Heat forward Justise Winslow named one of 15 players on U.S. National Select Team, to train in Las Vegas in July with Olympic team. SEE MORE VIDEOS

And then Wednesday, amid a promotional appearance in advance of Thursday's draft at Barclays Center in Brooklyn, Winslow, at 20, found himself cast in the role of adviser.

"It's all just surreal, being in New York yesterday, talking to some of the draftees and them asking me questions, them just being so interested and so anxious and nervous for the life that awaits them," he said. "It's just kind of full circle."

As it is, Winslow is one of just four Heat players under fully guaranteed contract for next season, along with Chris Bosh, Goran Dragic and Josh McRoberts. That had him noting one of the biggest adjustments in reaching this next level.

"I was talking to Buddy Hield about it yesterday," he said of the prized scoring guard out of Oklahoma, "just the fact that in college he was surrounded by the same group of guys pretty much all four years. He may have added three guys, lost three guys every season. But, for us, I've probably lost eight guys, gained seven guys this season. And next season might be completely different."

Among Winslow's offseason goals is to train in his Houston hometown with Rockets guard James Harden and also in Miami with Dwyane Wade and other members of the Heat, having resumed workouts two weeks ago.

"Hopefully we can get Dwyane and those guys in the gym," he said. "Hopefully we re-sign Dwyane, first of all."

As for his somewhat-wayward shooting stroke, Winslow said, "I'm really focusing on my shooting mechanics. I'm changing a couple of things."

Then there is another familiar face for Winslow, who shares representation with Oklahoma City Thunder free-agent forward Kevin Durant.

"I mean, I mess with his agent, joking with him," Winslow said. "But, no, he's a good guy. Rich Kleiman and K.D., they're going to make the best decisions for K.D. And so I haven't started publicly recruiting anybody yet, but I might in the next couple of days."

Eventually, Winslow will work with Durant in mid-July in Las Vegas, with Durant on the U.S. Olympic team and Winslow part of a group of young prospects to train against them as the U.S. Select Team.

"It's just kind of like a farm system in a sense," he said. "Whatever I can do to help the country, that's kind of how I see it."

iwinderman@sunsentinel.com. Follow him at twitter.com/iraheatbeat or facebook.com/ira.winderman