About

As kids, me and my little brother would talk about building a ship and sailing off to live out our dreams. We decided to make this dream an actual idea and now a life goal. After talking about it for over 2 decades we have decided we want to go into business for ourselves as a charter service offering personalized cruises.

We grew up in the age before everyone had computers and gadgets. We spent most of our time in the woods building tree houses and on the beach building rafts and boats to get us into some pretty sketchy situations we can look back at now and laugh. My little brother loves to fish and me, well, I like to adventure and explore.

Along the way we have picked up more interested people as well; my fiancée and soon to be mother of our first child has a passion for cooking, she also has a culinary degree and experience to back it up. She is going to be our chef for the vessel.

My little brother has been schooled in culinary as well, but his heart is set on being our on board fisherman. I believe they both go hand and hand a bit when it comes down to filleting and preparing food for meals and his skill set at both are truly astounding.

As for me, I've served some time in the military. But, I felt it was time for a new direction in my life. Somehow in those 8 years of traveling to the furthest reaches of this planet I feel like I found my true calling and I knew what I needed to do. So, now I've returned home to start school and make this project my mission and my life. I am attending Kingsborogh College for the Maritime technology program, I will be doing an internship with a few ship yards and ferry services while in the program. I will graduate in about 2 years with a degree and my captains license, then it will be time to begin a third degree in Engineering. My first degree, from the military, is in restaurant, hotel and fitness management which I also have a lot of experience to back. I also take classes in sailing.

We have the passion, ambition and drive to make this project happen. We have the knowledge, the know how and experience in what we are trying to do. We know this project will turn into an amazing investment

with an extremely fruitful return. But we don't exactly have the funds to start the project ourselves at this moment. So we have turned to Kickstarter to see if we can get this ball rolling and make the dreams of our childhood into the reality we live everyday.

~Thank you for reading this even if you can not donate anything. Please pass this along to anyone you think may help in our cause.

~Cyrus Blades