The 49ers practice Monday for the first time since their exhibition-opening, 27-17 win at Kansas City on Friday. Here are the top three things to watch:

1. Jimmie Ward’s status: After straining a hamstring 18 days ago in a conditioning test, projected starting safety Jimmie Ward is expected to start practicing this week. But first he must pass a series of tests, and according to Monday’s injury report, he remains on the physically unable to perform list.

“If we don’t feel 100-percent great about it, we’re not going to risk Jimmie getting out there and re-injuring it, setting him back,” Kyle Shanahan said. “If we don’t get a 110-percent positive report, then we’ll just push it another few days.” Like our San Francisco 49ers Facebook page for more 49ers news, commentary and conversation.

Ward transitioned in the offseason program to the free safety “eraser” role, having played cornerback last season and nickel back his first two years. Jaquiski Tartt did not play Friday because of a rib issue, and the 49ers started rookie Lorenzo Jerome at free safety.

Others not practicing Monday: defensive tlinemen DeForest Buckner (ankle) and Ronald Blair (groin); safety Chanceller James (knee), wide receiver Aaron Burbridge (hamstring), lineackers Jayson DiManche (hamstring) and Donavin Newsom (concussion).

Limited Monday are cornerback Dontae Johnson (concussion; no contact), tight end George Kittle (hamstring) and linebacker Brock Coyle (rib).

2. Rookie receiver’s momentum: Kendrick Bourne helped his case to seize an unlikely roster spot with his showing Friday. Bourne admitted afterward he hasn’t had a sharp training camp trying to learn the system, having missed all but the final day of the offseason program because it conflicted with Eastern Washington’s academic calendar.

“I was definitely kind of struggling and messing up routes during camp. Mike was kind of not trusting me,” Bourne said of receivers coach Mike LaFleur. “There was stuff I couldn’t remember. I was busting routes.” For complete 49ers coverage follow us on Flipboard.

Bourne had four receptions for 88 yard, and he tied the score at 17 with a 46-yard touchdown catch and ensuing two-point conversion on C.J. Beathard’s fade to the right side. (Yes, a right-side fade finally came through in the clutch, when the stakes weren’t quite as high as the Super Bowl.)

“I was locked in and ready to go,” Bourne said. “I studied real hard because I knew I’d be in the game, so I didn’t want to make mistakes today. That’s what practice is for, to make mistakes.”

Bourne’s 6-foot-1 frame makes him one of the team’s taller targets, so he’ll have to repeatedly prove that on a corps likely to include Pierre Garçon, Marquise Goodwin, Jeremy Kerley, Aldrick Robinson and Trent Taylor. Is there room for a sixth wide receiver?

Related Articles Will 49ers franchise tag of Robbie Gould thwart Bears pursuit?

Raiders will return to Coliseum — and everybody ends up looking bad

49ers player joins No One Eats Alone Day at San Jose school

Will Kaepernick settlement with NFL officially end his career?

Decision reached in collusion grievance brought by Colin Kaepernick and Eric Reid against the NFL 3. Details and discipline: Drawing 21 penalties – 17 were accepted – is an astounding amount. Illegal formation and false start issues are most troubling. Shanahan said: “We definitely got the attention of our players now and I would be surprised if you guys saw the same thing next week.”

Competition will intensify this week as the Denver Broncos arrive for joint practices Wednesday and Thursday in advance of Saturday’s exhibition.