Get the biggest daily stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Tributes have poured in following the sudden death of a 16-year-old soccer player.

Izzy Dezu collapsed while playing for the Shelbourne FC youth academy during a game against St Kevin's Boys at the AUL Complex on Clonshaugh Road, north Dublin.

The talented footballer's club led the way with tributes on Wednesday.

In a statement, Shelbourne FC said: "We are heartbroken to have to confirm the news that our Academy U16 player, Izzy Dezu, collapsed and died during a match at the AUL Complex last night.

"The thoughts of everyone at Shelbourne FC are with his family, friends, teammates and coaches who have been devastated by his tragic loss.

"May he rest in peace."

Izzy's friends took to social media on Wednesday to share heartfelt messages.

One pal said: "It's killing me having to write this, but today I lost someone very special, but not only special to me but special to a lot of people that knew him.

"Izzy Dezu was one of the best and he left a huge gap in my life today.

"We used to absolutely kill eachother everyday of the week but still no matter what, [we] always had eachother's backs and had the best laughs when we where together.

"No matter what I'll never ever forget you and neither will any of the boys.

"You of all people this happens to "the big friendly giant" not once have I ever seen you harm someone or be nasty.

"You had a heart of gold man and everyone loved you for that."

St Kevin's Boys also issued a statement passing on their condolences to the club and said that it's "very sad for the whole game of football" when something this tragic happens.

They said: "We at St Kevin’s Boys FC would like to pass on our condolences to the family, friends and everybody at Shelbourne FC after their young academy player Izzy Dezu collapsed and died in a game last night.

"It's very sad for the whole game of football when something as tragic as this happens in a football match. We would like to thank all the people who rushed over and gave the best medical attention until the medics arrived.

"People from Shelbourne, SKB, Shamrock Rovers and Bohemian Football Club were there to help, football clubs coming together to help a young man. R.I.P."

Collinstown FC also passed on their condolences.

They said in a statement: "Collinstown FC would like to pass on our condolences to the family, friends and everybody at Shelbourne FC after their young U16 academy player Izzy Dezu collapsed and died in a game DDSL game last night."