Houston rodeo removes offensive Disney cartoon begin sold at its fairgrounds



A display at the NRG Center during the Houston Rodeo features bootleg versions of the movie "Song of the South". The movie is widely considered offensive by today's standards.

Keep clicking to see other cartoons that are considered offensive or have been banned. Song of the SouthA display at the NRG Center during the Houston Rodeo features bootleg versions of the movie "Song of the South". The movie is widely considered offensive by today's standards.Keep clicking to see other cartoons that are considered offensive or have been banned. less

A display at the NRG Center during the Houston Rodeo features bootleg versions of the movie "Song of the South". The movie is widely considered offensive by today's standards.

Keep Song of the SouthA display at the NRG Center during the Houston Rodeo features bootleg versions of the movie "Song of the South". The movie is widely considered offensive by today's standards.Keep ... more Photo: Camilo Smith Photo: Camilo Smith Image 1 of / 45 Caption Close Houston rodeo removes offensive Disney cartoon begin sold at its fairgrounds 1 / 45 Back to Gallery

Some cartoons and movies made in the 1950s and 1960s don't hold up today mainly because of stereotypes. While the Warner Bros. character Speedy Gonzalez, a stereotype of Mexican immigrants, has stood the test of time, other characters from television and movies haven't. Take for instance Uncle Remus and the animated characters from "Song of the South."

"The film's live-action depictions of Uncle Remus and his fellow smilin', Massah-servin' black folk are embarrassingly racist," according to an article on Slate.com. The movie has never been released on DVD, but is available in underground bootleg networks online and in some stores. The movie was on display and available for purchase on DVD at this year's RodeoHouston. However, once rodeo officials were contacted about the movie by La Voz, it was later removed.

"The Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo was made aware today that one of its vendors was selling copies of a movie that has not been released for home viewing in the United States," according to a statement from rodeo Officials. "The copies have been removed from the vendor's booth."

Click on the slideshow above to learn more about cartoons that have racial stereotypes or have been banned.