We run through 10 of the most beautiful castles in Scotland, let us know if you think we have left any out. A visit to Scotland would surely be incomplete without becoming caught up in the turbulent history and fascinating stories that lay behind the stone walls of its many castles. Scattered across the country, […]

We run through 10 of the most beautiful castles in Scotland, let us know if you think we have left any out.

A visit to Scotland would surely be incomplete without becoming caught up in the turbulent history and fascinating stories that lay behind the stone walls of its many castles. Scattered across the country, over two thousand magnificent castles offer travellers a wondrous serving of escapism amongst the wilderness of the Scottish landscape. Here, we round up the top ten castles that should hastily be scribbled into your Scottish bucket list…

Dunnottar Castle

On the edge of the North Sea, just south of Stonehaven, stands the formidable fortress of Dunnottar Castle. Restored in 1925, the castle ruins sit atop a huge, rocky outcrop, surrounded almost entirely by steep cliffs that plummet to the waters below. A visit to Dunnottar is well worth the journey if only to watch the evening sun illuminate the castle’s jagged exterior. It’s a breath-taking view that you won’t soon forget.

A post shared by Craig Anderson | Scotland (@ardentform) on Jan 31, 2017 at 12:19am PST

Inveraray Castle

Located on the shore of Loch Fine, the longest sea loch in Scotland, Inveraray Castle is often considered to be a country house or stately home. But its spectacular exterior, which has previously been captured on camera in Downton Abbey’s 2012 Christmas Special, is undoubtedly fit for a king. Steep conical turrets and a third floor were added to the structure in 1877 after a fire had spread through its interior, whilst a second fire in 1975 put the future of the castle in jeopardy. Following extensive restoration however, Inveraray now overlooks 16 acres of beautiful gardens that can be enjoyed by visitors all year round.

A post shared by Kazim Ghafoor (@kazimghafoor) on Aug 23, 2017 at 11:30am PDT

Castle Stalker

This four storey, tower keep on Loch Laich is notoriously difficult to visit. Surrounded by water and privately owned, there are only a limited number of tours that invite visitors through its doors each year. Yet, the castle, and its magnificently rugged backdrop provided by the Morvern Hills, is even more captivating when seen from afar. Visible even from the A828, between Oban and Glencoe, visitors might recognise Castle Stalker by another name – one which is perhaps more peculiar than its own – ‘The Castle of Aaaaaaaaaaaarghh’ from Monty Python and the Holy Grail.

A post shared by Gordon (@gord.cook) on Aug 28, 2017 at 11:21am PDT

Kilchurn Castle

At the head of Loch Awe stands a five storey tower house belonging to Kilchurn Castle. Built in the 1400s by the first Lord of Glenorchy, the fact that this tower still stands is remarkable in its own right. For visitors though, who may reach the site by boat from Lochawe Pier, the chance to walk Kilchurn’s battlements and relish in the immeasurable view it provides is a truly invigorating and exceptional experience.

A post shared by Daniel Casson ?? (@dpc_photography_) on Jul 10, 2017 at 12:05pm PDT

Eilean Donan Castle

Situated on its own tidal island, Eilean Donan Castle marks the point where Loch Duich, Loch Long and Loch Alsh unite. Accessible by a single stone bridge, this 13th Century castle was once a magnificent family home, with views across the water reflecting the mountains of Kintail in its ripples. Whilst, in 2001, the island’s recorded population stood at a grand total of one, the most recent census shows that even the island’s final resident has disappeared.

Special glow over a special castle ❤️ A post shared by Connor Mollison | Scotland (@connormollison) on Aug 21, 2017 at 11:43am PDT

Craigievar Castle

Nestled in the heart of Aberdeenshire, Craigievar Castle is a Princess’ dream. With its sculpted turrets and tickled pink exterior, it’s widely rumoured that Craigievar’s Scottish Baronial architecture was the inspiration behind Walt Disney’s famous castle motif. Visiting Craigievar on a dry day allows visitors to explore the castle’s sweeping gardens; perhaps even following one of its two waymarked walks.

A post shared by Mikaela Eriksson (@mika.eriksson) on Aug 11, 2017 at 6:58am PDT

Caerlaverock Castle

If ever you need inspiration for building a castle, Caerlaverock Castle would be it. Complete with picture-perfect moat and a grand, turreted entrance, Caelaverock truly looks as though it has been torn from the pages of medieval history books. Standing on the southern coast of Scotland, the strength of this triangular stronghold is proven by the substantial ruin that remains there to this day. The surrounding area is internationally recognised for its waterfowl and wading birds, whilst smaller visitors will be delighted by Caerlaverock’s castle themed adventure park.

A post shared by Maggie Cristler (@europecastlespalaces) on Feb 24, 2016 at 1:24pm PST

Dunvegan Castle

First built in the 13th Century, Dunvegan castle was remodelled as a mock medieval build some 600 years later. Situated just a mile to the north of Dunvegan on the Isle of Skye, the castle stands as the longest continuously inhabited castle in Scotland. Steeped in over 800 years of Clan history, the magnificent grounds of Dunvegan are as intriguing as they are beautiful; with a stunning maze of water features, walled gardens and glass houses offering a sanctuary to those that visit.

A post shared by laura pennafort (@laupennafort) on Aug 3, 2017 at 4:35pm PDT

Duart Castle

Duart Castle became the ancestral home of Clan MacLean after having been included in a dowry received by the 5th Clan Chief in 1350. Brought back from ruin in 1911, Duart Castle on the Isle of Mull now offers its visitors action packed experiences swathed in the spirit of Duart. After walking amongst its shadowy dungeons, visitors will be relieved to emerge into the swirl of fresh Scottish air atop the castles battlements. Whilst below, events in the grounds include ghost tours, displays of swordsmanship and theatre company performances.

A post shared by The Highland Collective (@thehighlandcollective) on Jul 22, 2017 at 12:31pm PDT

Ardvreck Castle

Ever since fire devastated Ardvreck Castle in mysterious circumstances in 1737, its gnarled remains have become a striking feature amongst its spectacular mountain surroundings. Historians believe that Ardvreck was once a formidable structure, with a stunning walled garden and magnificent courtyard. Now however, when waters rise from Loch Assynt, Ardvreck can often be cut off from the mainland – leaving little more than an enthralling, knotted mass of stone emerging from the ground.

A post shared by The Highland Collective (@thehighlandcollective) on Jul 26, 2017 at 11:01am PDT

Think our list should have been different? Let us know your bucket list favourites in the comments below.