Future teachers are finding their job prospects may be better abroad than in their home province considering the decline in enrolment and the list of schools under review for closure in New Brunswick.

A job fair for education students at the University of New Brunswick on Thursday drew 30 school boards and organizations to try and lure prospective teachers.

Only one of them was from New Brunswick, and only half were Canadian. More than an third of the exhibitors were from the United Kingdom.

New Brunswick's four anglophone school boards currently have just two full-time teaching vacancies posted online.

Kiera Stillwell of Keswick Ridge says she's "not naive to the fact there are not many teaching jobs in this province." (CBC) Rhea Malatestinic of Hampton is working on her master's degree in education and, like other graduating students, realizes she may have to travel to find work after graduation.

"It seems like you need French. It's a big thing," she said.

"I do have French, but even then the job prospects [in New Brunswick] seem a little grim I guess. Half the recruiters here are for the U.K., so that says something itself."

Half the recruiters here are for the U.K., so that says something itself. - Rhea Malatestinic, fourth-year education student

Kiera Stillwell, a final year education student from Keswick Ridge, is prepared to travel to the U.K. or Latin America to teach after graduation.

"Ideally, I'd like to stay here and work but I'm not naive to the fact there are not many teaching jobs in this province and I'm not bilingual, so I'm definitely keeping my options open," said Stillwell.

"I love to travel. I'd go anywhere."

Holly Lydon of Atlantic Education International is looking to recruit 85 teachers to teach the New Brunswick curriculum in schools in China, Bangladesh and Brazil. (CBC) Atlantic Education International offers the New Brunswick curriculum at schools in China, Bangladesh and Brazil and was at the fair looking to recruit 85 teachers.

"We can offer a service where we can provide jobs where they can go to other countries and get some experience and come back and hopefully teach in their own province," said Holly Lydon of Atlantic Education International.

Caitlin King, a British recruiter from UTeach Recruitment, says England needs teachers because fewer young people can afford to study education.

"Canadian teachers have excellent qualifications that transfer well in the U.K. system and there's also not too much of a difference between the curriculum here and the curriculum there," said King.