Allies: Christian beliefs cost Texas schools chief his post School board reins yanked from McLeroy

Supporters say his Christian beliefs cost him the post

Don McLeroy, shown in 2000, believes in creationism. Don McLeroy, shown in 2000, believes in creationism. Photo: HARRY CABLUCK, Associated Press File Photo: HARRY CABLUCK, Associated Press File Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Allies: Christian beliefs cost Texas schools chief his post 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

AUSTIN — In a rare rejection of an appointment by the Texas governor, the Senate Thursday ousted Don McLeroy as chairman of the State Board of Education, with his supporters claiming the Bryan dentist was the victim of his strong religious beliefs. McLeroy is a devout Christian who believes in creationism and the notion that the Earth is about 6,000 years old. He has steadfastly argued that Texas students should be taught the weaknesses of evolution. His opponents portrayed him as “a decent human being” lacking leadership skills to chair the board divided between social conservatives and others. He will remain a member of the board. “It’s not about evolution versus creationism, and it’s not about Democrats versus Republicans,” Sen. Kirk Watson, D-Austin, told his colleagues. “This is not about partisanship. Please forget all the shouting and protests about this nomination from day one. This is about his leadership as chairman.” McLeroy’s hometown senator, Steve Ogden, R-Bryan, defended the chairman, saying “his service has not been incompetent, illegal or out of bounds.” “I think Texas is watching here because I think, whether intentional or not, there will be a perception … that we are applying a religious test for serving in this state,” Ogden said. Earlier this year, the State Board of Education approved new science curriculum standards that changed a long-standing Texas tradition over how schoolchildren learn about evolution. The vote did away with a provision that Texas students be instructed on the strengths and weaknesses of evolution and the theory about the origin of life developed by Charles Darwin 150 years ago. “If this isn’t about evolution, if this isn’t about what the Bible teaches, what is it all about?” asked Sen. Dan Patrick, R-Houston, referring to opposition to McLeroy. Democrats argued that McLeroy’s leadership has polarized the board, and that he has disregarded experts in the shaping of science curriculum standards and English, language arts and reading standards for 4.7 million Texas public school children. “The state board has become increasingly divided and deeply dysfunctional and almost paralyzed to action at certain times,” Sen. Leticia Van de Putte, D-San Antonio, said. Senate confirmation of gubernatorial appointments requires a two-thirds vote. McLeroy won the support of all 19 Senate Republicans, but 11 Democrats voted against him. It takes 11 votes to block an appointment. Sen. Eddie Lucio, D-Brownsville was present but did not vote. The Senate seldom rejects gubernatorial appointments. The Senate’s blocking of McLeroy will force Gov. Rick Perry to appoint a new board leader.

gscharrer@express-news.net