Teresa Giudice net worth: Teresa Giudice is a reality television star and author who has a net worth of of -$11 million. Teresa Giudice and her husband Joe are cast members on the Bravo reality show The Real Housewives of New Jersey and have been since the beginning. She was born Teresa Gorga in Paterson, New Jersey in 1972 to parents who are Italian immigrants. She has one brother, Joe Gorga, who's wife, Melissa, is also a cast member of The Real Housewives of New Jersey. Teresa Giudice attended Berkeley College, where she majored in Fashion Marketing and Management and after leaving college, held the position as a contributor to Vogue Magazine; she also worked for Macys as an accessories buyer. In addition to the Real Housewives, Teresa Guidice has appeared on shows like Live With Regis and Kelly, TheToday Show, Rachael Ray, Who Wants to be a Millionaire, and more. She has appeared on the cover of Life & Style, U.S. Weekly, People and OK Magazine. She periodically blogs for the websites of People.com and Bravotv.com, and has released four cookbooks called Skinny Italian, Fabulicious!, Fabulicious Fast & Fit, and Fabulicious! On the Grill. Teresa has also established her own jewelry line, as well as her fashion and accessories line called TG Fabulicious. She produces everything from flowered hairbows to baseball caps, designed for young girls and women. There are screen printed T-shirts with expressions such as, "Happy Wife, Happy Life" and "Delicious." Her jewelry consists of bracelets, which she has named after each of her daughters, Audriana, (2009), Milania (2005), Gabriella (2004), and Gia (2001). She also showcased her business savvy while starring on Celebrity Apprentice in 2012, where she raised $70k for the charity, NephCure.

In 2011, Joe and Teresa filed for bankruptcy. In their filing they claimed to be more than $11 million in debt. They were forced to auction many of their household items and put their mansion up for sale. On July 30, 2013, both Joe and Teresa Giudice were indicted with 39 counts of conspiracy to commit mail fraud, bank fraud, wire fraud, bankruptcy fraud and making false statements on loan applications. Both Teresa and Joe face a maximum of 50 years in jail and Joe, who is not a US citizen, could be deported back to Italy. In the indictment, the government claims Joe and Teresa overstated their incomes to receive roughly $4.6 million in mortgages and lines of credit. They allegedly then under-stated their income and net worth while filing for bankruptcy protection. Teresa Giudice served her prison sentence at Danbury Correctional Facility for women.