If you can get your hands on duck eggs try them!

I grew up having both chickens and runner ducks and the eggs taste 100% better than a grocery store egg. Eggs you buy at the grocery store are at least 3 weeks old! I am helping out a local farmer in Boulder, Co. and have had access to duck eggs again. So I have been experimenting with them in my baking. When I use duck eggs, I have to adjust the recipe due to the size and also the ratio of yolk to white. When I make sunny side duck eggs, I notice that the white can get rubbery. Duck eggs have less water, so it is easy to over cook them. Yes, it is more expensive then the grocery store but it is well worth it! The average certified organic eggs per dozen cost $5.00 for chicken and $7.00 for ducks.

Duck Eggs Vs Chicken Eggs: Size

-Most duck eggs are about 70 grams in weight and chicken eggs are about 50 grams.

I also noticed that a duck eggshell is a lot tougher than a normal chicken eggshell. Some people say because of the thicker shell that duck eggs can be kept in the refrigerator for up to six weeks. I recommend buying eggs from a local farm and using them within a week unless you plan to make a meringue. For meringues I like to use at least a week old eggs. It will whip better and get more volume. Because the duck egg is larger, it has a larger yolk to white ratio than a chicken. So if you want more yolks- then duck eggs are the way to go.

Duck Vs Chicken Eggs: Nutrition

Duck eggs have a few more calories! (A 100 gm of duck egg will provide about 185 KCal of energy, compared to 149 KCal of energy provided by a chicken egg)

Higher Protein in duck eggs!

Mineral content better in duck eggs!

Duck eggs have a higher Vitamin Content!

Duck eggs have a considerably higher cholesterol content, compared to chicken eggs.

Duck Vs Chicken Eggs: Taste

Duck eggs taste different and I believe they are tastier than chicken eggs. So it is best if you try one out to decide! Every thing you do with a chicken egg, can be done with a duck egg. That includes scrambling them, poaching and baking.

Duck Vs. Chicken Eggs: Baking

Many bakers comment that duck eggs have a higher fat content that make cakes rise higher and the meringues are more stable and can get more volume.

Duck eggs make baked items fluffier than chicken eggs- you will be amazed. You substitute one duck egg per chicken egg in the recipe, even though the duck eggs are bigger.

Due to the higher yolk ratio to egg white in duck eggs they contain more fat which in turn makes Baked goods richer.

“They are also a good addition to gluten free baking—what your baked good loses in structure by omitting gluten can be partially gained back with the denser albumen (egg white protein)”. -Jamie Oliver

Animals on the Jacob Springs farm located in Boulder, CO.

This video will make you laugh. It is a video that my mom made the night before all the ducks got attacked by the mob aka an animal.

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ulx0oucWtcI



