A former “Saturday Night Live” star is bashing President Trump, calling him a “moron” who “struggled” to read scripted jokes when he hosted the show as a White House hopeful.

Having Trump guest host the NBC sketch comedy series in December 2015 was “not fun,” former cast member Taran Killam told Brooklyn magazine in an interview published this week. Most of the “cast and writers were not excited to have him there,” the 35-year-old comedian says.

“I didn’t get the feeling that he was excited to be there, and it felt like a move for ratings from both sides,” Killam says.

ADVERTISEMENT

Other presidential contenders, including Sen. Bernie Sanders Bernard (Bernie) SandersPush to end U.S. support for Saudi war hits Senate setback Sanders: 'I fully expect' fair treatment by DNC in 2020 after 'not quite even handed' 2016 primary Sanders: 'Damn right' I'll make the large corporations pay 'fair share of taxes' MORE (I-Vt.) and his then-rival for the Democratic presidential nomination, Hillary Clinton Hillary Diane Rodham ClintonSanders: 'I fully expect' fair treatment by DNC in 2020 after 'not quite even handed' 2016 primary Sanders: 'Damn right' I'll make the large corporations pay 'fair share of taxes' Former Sanders campaign spokesman: Clinton staff are 'biggest a--holes in American politics' MORE, also made cameos on the show during the 2016 race.

When asked if Trump was “unpleasant,” Killam replies, “He was ... everything you see. What you see is what you get with him, really. I mean, there was no big reveal.”

Killam, who parted ways with “SNL” in 2016 after a six-year run, told the mag that the 70-year-old real estate mogul “struggled to read at the table read, which did not give many of us great confidence. Didn’t get the jokes, really. He’s just a man who seems to be powered by bluster.”

Since appearing on the show, Trump has repeatedly taken aim at “SNL” and Alec Baldwin’s recurring impersonation of him. Trump wrote in a tweet last December that the series was “totally biased,” “not funny,” and “unwatchable.”