

Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump speaks during a campaign event in Kansas City on Saturday.. (Photo by Jabin Botsford/The Washington Post)

Republican front-runner Donald Trump threatened Sunday to send his supporters to infiltrate the campaign rallies of Democratic hopeful Bernie Sanders, who Trump continued to insist was behind disruptions at his events.

Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump told his supporters in Ohio that the scuffles caused at his Chicago rally the night before were caused by supporters of Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders. (Reuters)

“Bernie Sanders is lying when he says his disrupters aren't told to go to my events,” Trump said on Twitter. “Be careful Bernie, or my supporters will go to yours!”

Bernie Sanders is lying when he says his disruptors aren't told to go to my events. Be careful Bernie, or my supporters will go to yours! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 13, 2016

Trump said during an appearance Sunday on CNN’s “State of the Union” that he didn’t consider his post on social media to be a threat. He repeated his charge that Sanders had lied when he said his campaign wasn’t behind an influx of protesters that led to the cancellation of Trump’s planned rally in Chicago on Friday, where violence spilled onto the streets.

[Sanders: ‘Hatred and division,’ not his campaign, inspired the Trump protest in Chicago]

Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders refuted charges from Republican Presidential candidate Donald Trump that Sanders is sending protesters to disrupt Trump's rallies. (Reuters)

Appearing later on the same program, Sanders said Trump was the liar.

“This man cannot stop lying,” the senator from Vermont said.

Sanders said he has many supporters, and while some may attend Trump events as a form of peaceful protest, they are not doing so at his direction.

“I would hope my supporters will not disrupt meetings,” Sanders said. “We have millions of supporters, and people do things. But it was not our campaign.”

He blamed Trump for creating the environment that has led to violence at his rallies.

“This a man who keeps implying violence, and then you end up getting what you see,” Sanders said.

During his appearance, Trump predicted that if his supporters come to Sanders events, they would be be treated badly.

“They’d be arrested and all sorts of things would happen to them,” Trump said.