According to the independent pollster, the latest decline in Najib’s support was rooted in Malaysia’s lagging economy, as well as the impending implementation of the GST in April. — File pic

KUALA LUMPUR, Feb 27 — Datuk Seri Najib Razak’s approval rating as prime minister fell again in the latest Merdeka Center survey, dropping four percentage points to 44 per cent in January.

According to the independent pollster, the latest decline in Najib’s support was rooted in Malaysia’s lagging economy, as well as the impending implementation of a new consumption tax in April.

“The negative sentiments were largely driven by economic factors, such as concerns over high cost of living, the general condition of the economy, as well as concerns over the impact of the upcoming implementation of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) on the public,” Ibrahim Suffian, who heads Merdeka Center, said in a statement accompanying the survey results.

In the previous edition of the survey last October, Najib recorded a positive rating of 48 per cent, down from 54 per cent in August and his personal best of 72 per cent in May 2010.

According to the latest poll, the Chinese were the least satisfied with Najib, recording an 18 per cent approval rating, while the Indians and Malays registered approval ratings of 44 per cent and 58 per cent respectively.

A total of 43 per cent were dissatisfied or angry with the government, while 38 per cent said they were happy with its performance.

Only about one in 10 Chinese respondents, or 11 per cent, expressed happiness with the government, compared to 34 per cent of Indians and 52 per cent of Malays.

Almost half of participants, or 47 per cent, believed that the country was headed in the wrong direction, citing high living costs and an unfavourable economy.

“Other reasons driving negative perceptions about the country’s direction includes perceived poor administration and continued racial polarisation in society,” said Ibrahim.

The 39 per cent who felt Malaysia was on a positive track based their views on a sense of security, favourable economic conditions and infrastructure development, as well as continued government welfare.

According to the poll, voters were most concerned about the economy at 62 per cent.

The survey, which was conducted from January 21 to 30, sampled 1,008 voters aged 21 and above across peninsula Malaysia.