Tom Papley has committed to the Swans for another two seasons.

Sydney Swans rookie Tom Papley has re-committed to the Club for a further two seasons.

Recruited in last year's rookie draft, Papley wasted no time adjusting to life as an AFL player, making his debut in Round 1 against Collingwood.

Papley has gone on to play 11 matches so far in his debut season, which included a Rising Star nomination for his two goal, 20-possession performance against West Coast in Round 5.

One of seven Swans debutants in 2016, Papley grew up in Bunyip in country Victoria and was working as an apprentice plumber before finally getting an opportunity on the Swans list – the same club both of his grandfathers played at.

Swans General Manager of Football Tom Harley says the Club is rapt to secure Papley's signature.

"Tom has been an exciting young player for us this season," Harley said.

"He has come into our side and made a solid contribution with his forward pressure and determination in the contest.

"We're really looking forward to watching Tom's progression as he continues to learn and grow in our team."

Papley joins Kieren Jack, Nick Smith, Luke Parker, Jeremy Laidler, Harry Cunningham, George Hewett and Aliir Aliir in recommitting to the Swans this season.

Tom Papley Stats

DOB: 13 July, 1996

Draft history: Pick 14, Rookie Draft 2015

AFL Debut: Round 1, 2016 v Collingwood

AFL Games: 11

AFL Goals: 15

Guernsey No: 41

Swans player No 1399



$41 ticket offer!

To celebrate this exciting news fans have the chance to purchase $41 tickets to our Round 20 match against Port Adelaide by using the password PAPLEY41.

Simply click here to take up this great offer today!

Ticket prices include GST. Transaction fees of $6.50 may apply and if a credit card is used credit card fees of 1.95% will apply. Limit of 10 tickets per transaction. Offer valid for Grandstand Category 3, Grandstand Category 4, Concourse Category 1 or Concourse Category 2 reserved seats when purchased online using a valid password. Not valid in conjunction with any other offer. Offer expires 11.59pm AEST on Tuesday, August 2 unless sold out prior.