About

Get YOUR Kicks on Route 66!

I have launched this Kickstarter campaign to raise funds for a documentary film about 5 superstars of the Scottish music scene as they play their way across America. No matter where you live in the world, you can help this film become a reality.

U.S. Highway 66 -- popularly known as Route 66 or the Mother Road -- holds a special place in American consciousness and evokes images of simpler times, mom and pop businesses, and the icons of a mobile nation on the road. Running through the nation’s heartland from Chicago to Santa Monica, the legendary road passes through many picturesque places, including my own home town, South Pasadena, California.

In April an all-star cast of bagpipers and drummers is taking to the road on a historic tour down Route 66, performing concerts and teaching workshops in what is being dubbed “Pipes & Sticks on Route 66.” Pipers Stuart Liddell, Willie McCallum, and Angus MacColl and snare drummer Jim Kilpatrick MBE, all from Scotland, are being joined by bass drummer and percussionist Mike Cole from Chicago. (click on names to see each player's video)

The five players are considered to be “the best of the best” in the world of piping and drumming. Each member of the group has won every important solo piping and drumming award several times. The players are well-known for their incredible talent and for their entertaining way on the stage. Concerts will consist of traditional tunes as well as crowd-pleasing numbers frequently requested. Humor will be an integral part of the concerts and audience participation is expected.

The guys approached me and asked if I’d like to make a documentary about the adventure. I didn’t have to think too hard about it as it seemed like the trip of a lifetime with all the potential of being a really entertaining film. My previous feature documentary, ON THE DAY: The Story of the Spirit of Scotland Pipe Band, was totally funded by contributions from the piping and Scottish community from around the world – and that was before I knew about Kickstarter. Last summer, I launched a successful Kickstarter campaign to fund the On The Day 3-Disc Collector’s Box Set, so now I’m reaching out to you again to make this project a reality.

Make sure you watch the video at the TOP OF THE PAGE and check out your rewards to the RIGHT >.

ABOUT THE GOAL AMOUNT

I want you to know that the $66,000 goal is the bare bones minimum amount to get the documentary shot and into the first phase of post-production, but does not cover the full budget of close to $200,000. Every penny will go into the production with no contingency and no salary to me. I hope the pledges will take us beyond the minimum goal so that the film will have even more production value, and I can be paid for my many months of work. And remember, Kickstarter is an all or nothing proposition: if the goal is not met, I get nothing and you pay nothing!

April 5 Chicago MEET & GREET Mo Dailey's Pub & Grille

April 7 Chicago CONCERT Irish American Heritage Center*

April 8 St. Louis JAM SESSION The Scottish Arms

April 10 Tulsa CONCERT Oklahoma State University*

April 11 Oklahoma City MUSIC TRIBUTE Memorial Park

April 12 Lubbock CONCERT Cactus Theatre*

April 14 Albuquerque CONCERT El Rey Theatre*

April 15 Albuquerque WORKSHOP for pipers & drummers

April 17 Flagstaff CONCERT American Legion Hall

April 18 The Grand Canyon

April 20 Pasadena PUB CRAWL on Colorado Blvd., Old Pasadena

April 21 Pasadena WORKSHOP 12pm-4pm for pipers & drummer

April 21 Pasadena CONCERT Westminster Presbyterian Church*

* Click the link to order your tickets now! Like us on FACEBOOK.

What if you want more rewards than those offered at your pledge level? The answer is at the bottom of the page under FAQ's.

More rewards will be added in the weeks ahead. So keep checking back in. You can donate again and again to get more rewards!

Thanks!