Before being gunned down, in an apparent Islamic State-inspired terrorist attack, a SOMALI MUSLIM man, 20, ran into a group of pedestrians on a street corner with his vehicle, then got out and used a butcher knife to cut several people, said OSU President. FBI refuses to rule out terror link. (Well, DUH)

NBC NBC News has identified the suspect as 18-year-old Somali Muslim Abdul Razak Ali Artan. Artan was an Ohio State student who left his homeland with his family in 2007. They lived in Pakistan before coming to the U.S., where Artan became a permanent resident in 2014.

UPDATE: A 20-year-old Somali man is the suspect in the Ohio State University attack https://t.co/G7ANHT8lbn pic.twitter.com/kdOzF7aWiV — CBS News (@CBSNews) November 28, 2016

Columbus police said a man driving a car on The Ohio State University campus jumped a curb and hit several pedestrians before getting out of his gray Honda Civic and stabbing others. Within one minute, police said, an OSU officer shot and killed the man and confiscated his butcher knife.

Here’s a photo of the DEAD MUSLIM TERRORIST.

CNN Ten people were hospitalized after an attack Monday at Ohio State University, Columbus Fire spokeswoman Rebecca Diehm said. Nine are in stable condition, and one is in critical condition, she said.

The university released a statement after the attack. “A suspect has been shot and reported deceased,” the university said. “Victim injuries include stab wounds, injury by motor vehicle and other injuries that are being evaluated.”

told CNN One witnessthat the attacker “completely silent” during the stabbing. The witness said the suspect “was very creepy.” The silence remained “even when he was shot.”

HE WAS RIGHT AGAINhttps://t.co/Sq13LIEZJk — Comrade Stump (@ComradeStump1) November 28, 2016

CNN will probably blame Donald Trump for that Somali refuge attacking the students at Ohio State University. #PrayersForOSU — Mark Dice (@MarkDice) November 28, 2016

Inquisitr Jason Bower, a student with the university, stated that he saw a man pull out a knife “between the Koffolt Laboratories and Watts Hall.” “He pulled a large knife and started chasing people around, trying to attack them,” the student was quoted.

WBNS reports NBC Columbus’ Ted Hart reports that nine people were injured. The station says that of those nine, eight are in stable condition while one is in critical condition.that a person attacked with a large knife is a professor at the school.

A speech by Ohio Governor John Kasich had been planned nearby the site of the attack for later in the day. The governor’s speech has now been cancelled (He’d hate to have to admit the attack was by a Muslim).

HEAVY In the A ugust 25 edition of the Ohio State Lantern, Artan was featured in the “Humans of Ohio State” feature. During his interview, Artan bemoaned the lack of pray facilities at OSU. He stresses in the piece that he needs to pray five times a day.

Artan adds, “I’m a Muslim, it’s not what the media portrays me to be. If people look at me, a Muslim praying, I don’t know what they’re going to think.”



