Researchers have developed a new material that demonstrates 'three-way shapeshifting' behaviour, changing its form in response to heat or light.

This is the first time scientists have achieved a single material that combines several smart capabilities – earlier efforts were limited to one function at a time.

The multifunctional material can fold and unfold itself based on the external stimulus, and can even heal itself when damaged.

Scroll down for video

Researchers have developed a new material that demonstrates 'three-way shapeshifting' behaviour, changing its form in response to heat or light. In a video demonstrating its capabilities, the smart material can be seen unfolding from a box-shape when light or heat is applied, and then returning to its original form

SHAPE-SHIFTING MATERIAL The researchers used a class of long-chain molecules known as liquid crystalline networks (LCNs) and synthesized three functional building blocks. The resulting LCN was found to demonstrate shape memory behaviour and light-activated movement. Not only can it remember its shape, but the LCN can heal itself – if scratched with a razor blade, the application of ultraviolet light will fix the wound. Researchers say this new material is the first which has the ability to perform multiple tasks at once – and it can even be tailored to add more.

To create the unique substance, researchers at Washington State University and Oak Ridge National Laboratory used a class of long-chain molecules known as liquid crystalline networks (LCNs) and synthesized three 'functional building blocks.'

These included azobenzene molecules, liquid crystals, and dynamic ester bonds, which allowed the team to 'program material responses to external stimuli at the molecular level,' the researchers explain in a paper published recently to ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces.

When combined, the resulting LCN was found to demonstrate shape memory, light-activated movement, and self-healing behaviour.

'We knew these different technologies worked independently and tried to combine them in a way that would be compatible,' said Michael Kessler, professor and Berry Family director at the School of Mechanical and Materials Engineering (MME).

According to the researchers, its movements can be pre-programmed and properties can be tailored for unique abilities.

Not only can it remember its shape, but the LCN can heal itself – if scratched with a razor blade, the application of ultraviolet light will fix the wound.

In a video demonstrating its capabilities, the smart material can be seen unfolding from a box-shape when light or heat is applied, and later returning to its original form.

Scientists have long shown interest in smart materials, but they haven't yet emerged for widespread use due to limitations in function.

The resulting LCN was found to demonstrate shape memory behaviour, light-activated movement, and self-healing behaviour

The team usd a class of long-chain molecules known as liquid crystalline networks (LCNs) and synthesized three 'functional building blocks.' These allowed them to 'program material responses to external stimuli at the molecular level'

Now, researchers say this new material has the ability to perform multiple tasks at once – and it can even be tailored to add more.

'On the basis of this approach, LCNs can be further advanced,' the researchers wrote.

'For example, a fourth functional building block may be incorporated into the system, e.g., magnetic-responsive or infrared-responsive blocks, which can be achieved by incorporating magnetic nanoparticles or single wall carbon nanotubes, respectively.'

These new capabilities could make smart materials more feasible for practical use rather than just novelty.