Just days after the U.S. Department of Justice announced the results of an investigation into the Albuquerque Police Department, three members of the Police Oversight Commission are quitting.Anna's full report | VIDEO | 3 Police Oversight Commission members quitIn their resignation letters to Mayor Richard Berry, Richard Shine, Jennifer Barela and Jonathan Siegel said they’re resigning because the civilian commission has no teeth.“The city attorney’s office addressed the POC on April 10, 2014, and stated that we have no power to decide against the APD Chief or against the independent review officer’s findings regarding citizens’ complaints,” reads Siegel’s letter. “I cannot continue to pretend or deceive the members of our community into believing that our city has any real civilian oversight.” The city responded Tuesday.“An effective Police Oversight Commission has the ability to play a very important role, as mentioned by the Department of Justice, and these are critical components for community oversight," said the city's Chief Administrative Officer Rob Perry. "I thank the POC members for their service. We are hopeful that the City Council which created this board and nominates its members, will work in consultation with the DOJ in continued efforts to reform and implement needed changes.”

Just days after the U.S. Department of Justice announced the results of an investigation into the Albuquerque Police Department, three members of the Police Oversight Commission are quitting.

Anna's full report | VIDEO | 3 Police Oversight Commission members quit

Advertisement

In their resignation letters to Mayor Richard Berry, Richard Shine, Jennifer Barela and Jonathan Siegel said they’re resigning because the civilian commission has no teeth.

“The city attorney’s office addressed the POC on April 10, 2014, and stated that we have no power to decide against the APD Chief or against the independent review officer’s findings regarding citizens’ complaints,” reads Siegel’s letter. “I cannot continue to pretend or deceive the members of our community into believing that our city has any real civilian oversight.”

The city responded Tuesday.

“An effective Police Oversight Commission has the ability to play a very important role, as mentioned by the Department of Justice, and these are critical components for community oversight," said the city's Chief Administrative Officer Rob Perry. "I thank the POC members for their service. We are hopeful that the City Council which created this board and nominates its members, will work in consultation with the DOJ in continued efforts to reform and implement needed changes.”

AlertMe