20

104 E Main St

Manchester , MI 48158



(734) 428-8003

We were eager to go to the newly renovated Frank's. The whole place has is cheerful, friendly, and sincere. Our pizza was excellent. They are passionate about making pizza. I wish the Greek salad was a less iceberg, more green. Everything was fairly priced. This place gives me hope for Manchester. I've lived in the area over 30 years. This is my favorite Manchester restaurant.

Frank's Place is the best pizza in Manchester - there's no doubt about that. Great taste and quality ingredients make it worth a go if you're in the mood for for pizza. My only knock is the price: it's much pricier than I expected. On my last visit, one small supreme/"super" pizza and one medium pepperoni set me back nearly $32 for takeout, which is quite a bit steeper than comparable non-chain pizza places around the state. Even still, I really enjoyed the pizza and will order again in the future. It's that good. Pro tip: Frank's also sells balls of dough if enjoy making your own pizza at home.

So my girl and I went for a drive right? We're like "Manchester, that's a town I guess" so we drive through. It's 7:45 PM and there's nothing open besides a couple of divey-looking bars. But then, this glowing open sign is on and we are it "Frank's Place". We park, we go in, there's a staff of cooks working their ass off making pizzas and cleaning, making entertaining conversation. We ask to eat in, so we shall. Food: Italian faire and some fried snacks. BUT THEY HAVE GRINDERS. OMG MEATBALL GRINDER. 18Inches of meaty saucy cheesy goodness. Holy shit. It was amazing. Got it with loaded waffle fries. FOR $14! Go here. Seriously.

Love the food. Always delicious. Food not the issue, called an order in and my daughter ended up getting hurt so we called back to let them know we were unable to pickup our order (didn't want to drive in the snow with an injured toddler) apologized in the panic of the moment. The woman yelled at me on the phone and was appauled that I had to cancel, swore at me and hung up. Not sure what made us deserve that with everything going on. Thanks Franks.

Fabulous pizza and pasta. Great service and prices. Really enjoyed our waitress and all the fresh ingredients.

Guy with amazing tats asked us, too! Great place- skip Ollie's and come on down the block to Frank's. We had the very yummy Sicilian bread (a cheese pizza- good but not necessary) and a thin crust, basil-pepperoni-onion-feta large pizza that was amazing except for the basil, which was, sadly, burned to an un-basil-y tasting crisp (ie hay) in the oven. It is far better to put it on pizza *after* cooking it. They make their own dough and you can taste the difference! Enough pizza for breakfast AND lunch the next day, too. Worth the drive from Ann Arbor. Highly recommended!

Well, there are very few places to eat in this lovely small town, so this gets a 4th star from me! We went to Manchester for fireworks, and enjoyed the picturesque drive from Ann Arbor as well as the fireworks celebration in town. The food was pretty good at Franks. The restaurant is a bit bare-bones with decorations and ambience... a no frills small town place! The best deal on the menu was the side salad. I had low expectations since it was only $2, but it was heaped with cucumbers, tomatoes, lettuce, onions, cheese, and croutons! Yum! I'd skip the icky thick basil vinaigrette dressing and go for something else though. The pizza was good (although we were offered "canned or fresh mushrooms"... canned??! ew!) and a large gave two of us about half to take home for leftovers. Sadly they don't sell beer or wine... that would be a nice upgrade! It's a good spot to check out if you are in town.

This is my favorite pizza in town. I could eat the Tomato, Butter, & Basil Pizza non-stop. So freakin' tasty.

I love when you're walking out and the kids covered in tattoos making pizzas sincerely ask how your experience was and thank you for coming in. I've been to Frank's, maybe a dozen times, over the last 15 years and I don't think the place has ever changed. The Sicilian bread is still to die for, the service is excellent. One of the best parts is how fresh the ingredients are and the variety! I don't eat meat so any place that gives me options like jalapeno, broccoli, spinach, fresh thinly sliced mushrooms, red onion... has got my number. They have a lot of options on the menu, but I make the trip primarily for the Sicilian cheesy bread. It's a must-have.

Excellent Pizza! Easily comparable to Buddy's. They seem to really care about the quality of their food. Highly recommended for the pizza adventurous. Located in a great little historic downtown. Worth the trip!

It is so nice to find someplace that is neither a chain pizza nor a gourmet pizzeria that is wood or coal fired. This is just a really good down to earth pizza. When I was ordering they even asked if I wanted fresh or canned mushrooms. I mean so does that. These people care about find it right. I highly reconvene this friendly and family owned place.

Found this small place to eat after a soccer game. Food and prices were both excellent! Their grinders are delicious! Maybe if I am back around this way I will try their pizza. Very happy we chose this place for a quick meal after a game!

What a wonderful establishment. The food is absolutely incredible. Awesome staff that is willing to meet your needs for your dining experience. The pizza is to die for. A bit pricey but worth the $$. There sandwiches are delicious as well, but pricey as well. Will be back soon !! Thank you Frank's!

I have been here several times and have always been impressed with everything. They have an amazing menu, the food has always been great, and everyone there is so friendly. Finally, and possibly most important to note, they have just started to serve donuts. These are made fresh daily starting at 3 a.m. each morning, and it shows. These just might be the best donuts possible.

Dined here after my skydive in tecumseh.. cant be happier.. friendly waitress.. great food.. extensive menu to choose from. Definitely recommend.

After a grueling 8 HR drive (due to ice, sleet and rain) which should have taken 6 HR, it was absolutely calming to have great pizza and friendly service! Thought they would be closed due to weather but they welcomed us in! Plan to make it a stopping off place from now on.

Never had a good meal from them. Tried them many times and either the meat was rank or the toppings for the sandwiches or other items were rotten. Amazed that this place is still in business but hey, that's a small town for ya.

This place, though small-town small, and quite honestly the only restuarant open in the afternoon, has quite an extensive menu. Pizza, burgers, whole wheat wraps, and basic sandwiches don the menu. I had the grilled tilapia sandwich on marbled rye with tomato, red onion (minus the "white" sauce which seems to be ladled on many of the menu items) and lettuce. It was actually quite good. The salad bar is really where it's at though, here. Beets (love), red onion, boiled eggs, yellow raisins, cottage cheese, and thinly sliced mushrooms are just some of the few yummies on the bar here. I LOVE thinly sliced mushrooms, yes I do. For good coffee, before coming to Franks, go to the Manchester coffee shop a few doors down and order an Americano.. (one of the employees now knows what an americano is after me coming here :) )

Love Franks. Excellent menu selection and nice little salad bar. I've never had anything bad there. My favorite place for pizza.