Le Snoot offers art without the "snooty side" of art, as founder Logan McDonald described it. The play on words and Le Snoot's iconic portly swine mascot define the antithesis of what McDonald did not want to see in his art gallery.

Le Snoot was founded in 2012, and the latest exhibit is called "A Tribute to Adult Swim."

"I was seeing there were more students who wanted to host shows that are outside of fine art," McDonald said. "The average cost of hosting a gallery show - including space rental, framing and other additional expenses - really adds up. It's not a thing everyone can afford. This created the idea of a non-conventional gallery where we use our in-house printing services to display digital works."

Featuring services such as high-quality printing, Le Snoot also offers free gallery space to artists.

The team consists of Logan McDonald, founder and creative director, Sasha Loseva, Le Snoot's accountant, and Kori Gibson, Le Snoot's client consultant.

"Although we have our titles and individual business strengths, our working together is what really makes Le Snoot," McDonald said.

As fans of different Adult Swim programming, the trio decided to introduce a new location with the tribute gallery.

The Adult Swim exhibition will open Oct. 17 at Le Snoot's new location at 11 W. Duffy St.

Gibson's connection to Adult Swim brought insight about the idea for the show.

"I've spent a lot of time watching Adult Swim. From its premiere in 2001, I can honestly admit it's really shaped my humor through to adulthood," Gibson said. "Adult Swim has always been there- bringing my friends and me together where we could sit back and talk about our favorite episodes. I've formed strong bonds with strangers from using references and quotes that other fans can pick up on.

"I used to think of Adult Swim as having only a cult following, but with each new show, I feel as if the fan base is growing stronger. Le Snoot (at the past location) had tribute shows before, such as our past "Adventure Time" tribute show. Logan and Sasha are also longtime fans of Adult Swim, and are excited by the concept."

A Tribute to Adult Swim will showcase works from local and non-local artists paying tribute to their favorite Adult Swim characters and programs.

Le Snoot staffers have their favorites, as well: McDonald's top show is "Superjail!" with favorite character Jeff Goldblum. Gibson's favorites are "Tom Goes to the Mayor" and Dr. Orpheus from "The Venture Bros." Lovesva loves "Squidbillies" with Early Culyer.

Expect to see unique creations featuring all the artists' favorite characters and shows at Le Snoot's Tribute to Adult Swim.

"Some of our best entrants will come in the day of the show," McDonald said.