2019 Symposium Online Pre-Registration

July 31 – August 3, 2019

Sandy, Utah

THEME: Threads in the Mormon Tapestry

Online Registration for the 2019 Summer Symposium will close July 26, 2019 at Midnight. After online registration is closed, you will need to register at the door.



This year, Sunstone is offering at option for our those that can’t travel to the physical symposium, but don’t want to miss out on the fun! Register as a digital attendee and get access to all of the great Sunstone content and be a part of the Symposium from anywhere. Click here to register.

Symposium Pre-registration Prices

Sunstone is happy to announce that all audio for sessions this year will be free and available to the public online six months following the symposium. In order to accommodate that change, our prices have changed. Please pay attention to the price differences below.

Please register only for the discounts for which you are eligible. All registration discounts will be verified by Sunstone, and any additional money owed due to inaccurate registration claims will be collected at the door before admittance to the Symposium. A current student ID must be presented at the registration desk to qualify for the student discount.

(If you have any difficulties registering, please email Sunstone at info@sunstone.org or call Grace at the office at 801-355-5926)

*If you are planning on eating dinner Saturday night at our banquet, you must purchase your ticket in advance. Dinner tickets must be purchased in addition to registration tickets. Dinner tickets are limited and available on a first-come basis.

IMPORTANT INFORMATION REGARDING REGISTRATION:

Once you register you will receive an email confirmation as well as a reminder one week prior to the event. Tickets will be available under the name registered at the check-in desk. If you are registering for more than one person, please include names for every ticket so that each attendee will have a correct name badge. 3-day registration includes full access to conference schedule (with exception of dinner ticket) Thursday 31 – Saturday 3, 2019. Each session is first-come up until room capacity is reached. Although there will be room for every attendee at the conference, Sunstone cannot guarantee admission into your preferred session. Please plan your schedule accordingly. If the session you wish to attend fills up, you will have to choose from another session on the program. There are a limited amount of single session tickets available for each session, please purchase single session tickets early to guarantee your spot into the session you wish to attend. If you missed a session you were hoping to attend, 2019 symposium audio can be purchased on site or online after the conference.

Online Registration for the 2019 Summer Symposium will close July 26, 2019 at Midnight. Prices increase $10 at the door.