Meet the new boss….

It was announced over the weekend that on June 7 John Dickerson will replace Bob Schieffer as the host of CBS News’ “Face the Nation.” CBS News president David Rhodes — whose brother Ben is a top Obama official most famous for editing the truth out of the infamous Benghazi talking points — said of Dickerson, “John is first and foremost a reporter — and that’s what he’ll be as anchor of ‘Face the Nation.’ “His work in the studio will always be informed by what he’s learned in Iowa, in New Hampshire, on Capitol Hill — anywhere there’s news.”

Here’s what the brother of a top Obama official did not tell you about Dickerson: that in a column for Slate published in the days leading up to President Obama’s second inauguration, Dickerson demanded Obama stop working with Republicans and declare war.

Why if he wants to transform American politics, Obama must declare war on the Republican Party…. The challenge for President Obama’s speech is the challenge of his second term: how to be great when the environment stinks. Enhancing the president’s legacy requires something more than simply the clever application of predictable stratagems. Washington’s partisan rancor, the size of the problems facing government, and the limited amount of time before Obama is a lame duck all point to a single conclusion: The president who came into office speaking in lofty terms about bipartisanship and cooperation can only cement his legacy if he destroys the GOP. If he wants to transform American politics, he must go for the throat. … Obama’s only remaining option is to pulverize. Whether he succeeds in passing legislation or not, given his ambitions, his goal should be to delegitimize his opponents. Through a series of clarifying fights over controversial issues, he can force Republicans to either side with their coalition’s most extreme elements or cause a rift in the party that will leave it, at least temporarily, in disarray.

Naturally, one of the Obama opponents Dickerson wants DestroyedPulverizedDelegitimized is the NRA:

Republicans who want to oppose the president on policy grounds now have to make a decision: Do they want to be associated with a group that opposes, in such impolitic ways, measures like universal background checks that 70 to 80 percent of the public supports? Polling also suggests that women are more open to gun control measures than men. The NRA, by close association, risks further defining the Republican Party as the party of angry, white Southern men.

Dickerson closed his screed by warning Obama that he “has no time to waste.”

This isn’t a column. This isn’t analysis. It is a strategy memo — a half-time speech; equal parts pep talk and tactical session.

In summary:

— Benghazi threatens to engulf Hillary Clinton.

— The brother of Obama’s Benghazi spin-doctor runs CBS News.

— The brother of Obama’s Benghazi spin-doctor chose John Dickerson to host one the top Sunday talk shows on the same weekend Hillary announced her candidacy.

— The new host of this top Sunday talk show has publicly pleaded with President Obama to go to “war” with, “pulverize … destroy … and delegitimize” the GOP as a whole, and the NRA specifically.

– -As host of “Face the Nation,” Dickerson will now be in a better position to do this himself.

— This is the same CBS News that parted ways with Sharyl Attkisson — a 20 year veteran, and one of the few reporters in America who actually did pressure and question the Obama administration.

But I’m sure this is all coincidence. The media is not prepping the battlefield for Hillary, or anything. I’m paranoid, seeing things, blinded by sexism…

I mean, come on, it’s not like the media coordinates putting former-Democrat operatives in charge of its Sunday shows!

UPDATE: Oh, yeah.

2ND UPDATE: And yeah.

3rd UPDATE: Uhm...

Follow John Nolte on Twitter @NolteNC