Share:

ISLAMABAD - Pakistan is a sovereign country and it will not ‘take notices’ from any foreign country, Senate Chairman Mian Raza Rabbani said yesterday, in his address to Speaker’s Conference.

“Two days ago, [US vice president Mike] Pence had the gall, the audacity to say that [President] Trump has put Pakistan on notice. Let the word ring out in clear terms that Pakistan is a sovereign state and is not in the habit of taking notices from anyone, let alone the US.”

He added that “Pakistan does not need to take heed of any ‘notice’ from a foreign nation. We will never sacrifice on our basic rights as a sovereign country.”

The chairman said America was apparently trying to shift the blame for its defeat in Afghanistan on to Pakistan, and “it consistently refuses to recognise the sacrifices of the people of Pakistan in the war on terror.”

Rabbani’s daring remarks sent shivers across Pakistan Peoples Party leadership, which was quick to issue a statement saying the Senate chairman was no more a member of the party and his statements were “personal”.

Rabbai, further criticising the US, said that it seemed the United States has pursued a policy of “regime change and bringing about instability in Muslim countries” particularly in the Middle East.

Describing Trump’s decision to shift the US embassy in Tel Aviv to Jerusalem as the “blunder of all blunders”, the chairman said Washington had failed to understand that it is neither supported practically, nor by history in their decision to recognise Jerusalem as Israel’s capital.

He said the UN General Assembly had given a befitting reply to Washington when 128 countries rejected the US move.

“What they [US] fail to recognise is that the recognition of Jerusalem as Israel’s capital will give rise to a new Intifada as the people of Palestine move to achieve their historic rights” he added.

He said a new coalition between US, Israel and India was in the making.”Although Pakistan believes in dialogue and friendly relations with its neighbours, until and unless India is willing to speak on equal terms, we will perhaps just be looking at the mirage of peace in the region,” he added,

Rabbani said it was unfortunate that United Nations has failed to implement its resolutions on Kashmir. “Time has come for Asia to make its own decisions, or else the history will never forgive us” he added.

About the China Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) he said it had the potential to transform the economic fortunes of the region, ushering in a new era of prosperity. He said One Belt One Road (OBOR) project will not only benefit the Pakistan but the whole region.

PPP disowns Rabbani after he roars at US