Emergency call operators who respond to 999 calls held a second 12-hour strike in a dispute about pay and union recognition.

The stoppage began at 8am this morning and concluded at 8pm.

BT Ireland and Conduit Global, who run the service, said contingency arrangements were put in place to ensure there was no disruption to service and all emergency calls were handled as usual.

A Conduit Global statement said the company "strongly regrets the industrial action that was taken by a small number of members of the Communications Workers Union at one of the Emergency Call Answering Service centres today, in Navan, Co Meath.

"Public safety remained our highest priority and Conduit Global confirms none of the emergency service centres (Navan, Co Meath; Ballyshannon, Co Donegal; Eastpoint, Dublin) closed at any point during the day and that the service was fully operational."

The staff at the Emergency Call Answering Service who belong to the Communications Workers' Union want a basic pay increase in line with the Living Wage of €11.50 per hour, and the right to be represented by their union in negotiations.

The State contract for operating ECAS was awarded to BT Ireland, who in turn outsourced it to Conduit Global.

Both companies have defended the pay rates for staff and their decision not to negotiate with unions.

They have also declined an invitation from the Workplace Relations Commission to talks with the CWU, on the basis that they would prefer to negotiate with their employees directly.

The CWU held the first 12-hour stoppage in the dispute on 25 February with around 15 of the 60 operators joining the picket line at the Navan call centre.

Tomorrow, CWU members will also commence a month-long work to rule, whereby staff will withdraw from extra duties outside their employment contract.

CWU General Secretary Steve Fitzpatrick has accused BT Ireland and Conduit Global of "blatant corporate greed".

He noted that last year BT made a profit of €44 million in Ireland, which is up 42% on the previous year.

He added that Conduit Global had made Irish profits of over €6 million.