Leader of the Liberal Democrats Tim Farron has pledged to keep Britain in the EU (Picture: Getty)

The Liberal Democrats have pledged to take Britain back into the EU, claiming the Brexit was secured on a campaign of lies.

Voters backed the Leave campaign in a ‘howl of anger’ and should be given the chance to rethink the decision, according to Lib Dem leader Tim Farron.

The party said that ‘cheap’ slogans of Ukip’s Nigel Farage and Tories Boris Johnson and Michael Gove are ‘unravelling’, and the public will feel ‘betrayed’ when promises on the NHS and immigration are not delivered.

Since the referendum result on Friday morning, the Lib Dems claim thousands of voters have signed up to become members.

Farron said he will make the case for the country to rejoin the EU at the next general election.

MORE: EU referendum: What Brexit means for your money

Thousands have signed up to become Lib Dem members (Picture: Getty)

‘For many millions of people, this was not just a vote about Europe,’ he said.

Advertisement

Advertisement

‘It was a howl of anger at politicians and institutions who they felt they were out of touch and had let them down.

‘The British people deserve the chance not to be stuck with the appalling consequences of a Leave campaign that stoked that anger with the lies of Farage, Johnson and Gove.

‘The Liberal Democrats will fight the next election on a clear and unequivocal promise to restore British prosperity and role in the world, with the United Kingdom in the European Union, not out.

‘If you agree with us, join us to make this happen.’

The next general election is not due until 2020 under current laws but could be staged within months if the next Conservative leader decides to seek a mandate through a national vote.

Lib Dems would have to secure a two-thirds Commons majority, repeal legislation or see a vote of no confidence in the government for the snap poll to go ahead.

A Lib Dem spokesman said: ‘In 24 hours the cheap bus slogans of Farage, Johnson and Gove are unravelling.

‘On £350 million for the NHS, on immigration, it is clear that they will fail to deliver what people thought they had voted for. Once again, people will feel betrayed by out-of-touch politicians.

‘The Liberal Democrats are the only party united behind a future for Britain inside the European Union.’