Q: Most of Dion Waiters' minutes should go to Tyler Johnson. Dion is just not a player worth investing in. I'm sure he puts maximum effort. Some players have it and some just don't. -- Chris, Orlando.

A: These certainly are interesting times with the Heat, with Dion standing somewhat as the focus of the Heat's perimeter offense, be that because of other players deferring or Dion's confidence. Understand, after playing alongside Dwyane Wade, players such as Josh Richardson and Tyler Johnson have a certain natural inclination to defer. So you wind up with Dion getting the shot totals he has in the past two games (albeit in the absence of Goran Dragic), and taking the most meaningful shots against the Spurs and Hawks. And that's the fine line that Erik Spoelstra has to walk at this still-preliminary stage of the season: Do you put the ball in the hands of your young players and live with the consequences? Or do you go with the player who, at that moment, has the most confidence and experience in such situations. The Waiters situation is similar to the Heat's situation last season with Joe Johnson. There was talk about both continuing on with the team when the salary-cap reality going forward spoke otherwise. The difference at the end of last season with Johnson is that the Heat were admittedly living in the moment. Now it already appears that future moments are the priority.

Q: Haven't we seen all there is with Josh McRoberts over the years? He isn't a scorer. He is a flash-first player and hesitant to shoot even when wide open. His 3-point game is average and not enough to spread the floor. I guess I'm not seeing the upside or possibilities with Josh -- Paul, Fort Lauderdale.

A: Which is why I believe these current minutes are important, to finally get a read on what you have, to possibly showcase what you have, or to at least then know how to best move forward. This is not a team or an offense that can afford to have bystanders when it comes to scoring. Erik Spoelstra has been very good about issuing green lights, even insisting on it with players, such as Luke Babbitt. The Heat need offense. They need Josh McRoberts' offense. They should consider it almost insubordination if there is not an effort in that area.

Q: Hi, Ira. I see so many questions and comments about trading Goran Dragic right now. However, wouldn't it make better sense to wait until the trade deadline and let other teams' seasons play out? Wouldn't we have much more leverage if a team in the running is in need at that time? We are 10 games in and it's clear that this is a rebuild season, so what's the rush? Am I missing something? -- Wolf, New York.

A: You are not missing anything. And trades don't normally happen this early in a season, anyway. I believe this is more of a case of fans thinking out loud, forecasting what might be the best move for the team, not necessarily when something might happen. The trading deadline makes far more sense, especially when you consider that is when the Heat acquired Goran in the first place. Plus, by then you can have a far greater read of the possibilities at point guard of Tyler Johnson and Josh Richardson.