Heads-up: Parking tickets in New Orleans increase to $30 on Monday

If you find a parking ticket on your vehicle, it's going to cost you more to pay it off.City officials issued reminders that on-street parking tickets will increase beginning Monday. Tickets will increase from $20 to $30.The New Orleans City Council approved the increase earlier this month. Motorists should remember that if tickets are not paid after 30 days, the fine will increase to $60 and $90 after 60 days.Related: Mixed reactions after changes made to parking meter rates, enforcement hoursTickets for parking in a residential parking permit zone without a proper permit will also increase on Monday from $40 to $75.The parking ticket increases come after the city raised parking meter rates across New Orleans. In January, parking in the French Quarter, downtown and the Warehouse District increased to $3 an hour, while the rate increased to $2 an hour everywhere else.Link: Learn more about parking regulations in New Orleans hereEnforcement hours also changed in January. Motorists should remember that metered parking hours are now 8 a.m. to 7 p.m. Monday through Saturday.More information about the changes can be found on the city's website.Keep up with local news, weather and current events with the WDSU app here.

If you find a parking ticket on your vehicle, it's going to cost you more to pay it off.

City officials issued reminders that on-street parking tickets will increase beginning Monday. Tickets will increase from $20 to $30.

The New Orleans City Council approved the increase earlier this month. Motorists should remember that if tickets are not paid after 30 days, the fine will increase to $60 and $90 after 60 days.

Related: Mixed reactions after changes made to parking meter rates, enforcement hours

Tickets for parking in a residential parking permit zone without a proper permit will also increase on Monday from $40 to $75.

The parking ticket increases come after the city raised parking meter rates across New Orleans. In January, parking in the French Quarter, downtown and the Warehouse District increased to $3 an hour, while the rate increased to $2 an hour everywhere else.

Link: Learn more about parking regulations in New Orleans here

Enforcement hours also changed in January. Motorists should remember that metered parking hours are now 8 a.m. to 7 p.m. Monday through Saturday.

More information about the changes can be found on the city's website.

Keep up with local news, weather and current events with the WDSU app here.

AlertMe