Get the biggest What's On stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Those TV shows where assertive cleaners wade into houses full of junk and throw everyone’s anxiously amassed possessions in the skip - do they leave you crying or clapping?

Me, crying. And Clint Boon, too - the self confessed stockpiler of Stockport. Still, he’s the one laughing now because his inability to chuck things away resulted in one of the most sought after LPs on Record Store Day - the Inspiral Carpets’ Dung 4, the album they recorded 27 years ago with original singer Stephen Holt.

“I’m the biggest hoarder in the world,” Clint laughs. “I knew the tape was in there somewhere and it literally took me weeks and weeks of looking.

“Eventually I came across a Betamax tape, a digital master from 1987. So I got a Betamax machine, played it, and it sounded amazing. My wife has been giving it me in the neck for years, and I was like, ‘Now who’s the king hoarder, hey?’.”

Within a year of recording Dung 4, Stephen had left the band - impending marriage and mortgage requiring him to quit the music biz - and beyond a handful of cassettes produced to combat the bootleggers and sold in the small ads at the back of music magazines, the album got left on the shelf. Finally, on Monday, it gets an overdue full release on Cherry Red Records.

“Stephen left, and suddenly we got famous and travelled the world,” says Clint about the Inspirals’ heyday with Tom Hingley on vocals, during which the band scored four Top 20 albums, including debut Life, and many hit singles. “But 20 years later, Stephen steps back in and he’s warming up in Argentina to 8,000 people - it was just incredible, what a fairy tale.”

Holt’s return wasn’t without criticism despite the fact that he, with old pal Graham Lambert (guitar) and then 14-year-old drummer Craig Gill, laid the foundations for the band, beginning in 1983. Clint came on board some years later (bassist Martyn Walsh too, in 1989) after the band came to his Ashton-under-Lyne studio, at Guide Mill on South Street, to record a demo.

“I’d never heard of them, they were just some lads from Oldham, and we recorded three or four songs that became a demo they’d send out to pubs to get gigs,” Clint recalls.

“By the third session, I’d joined the band because I had the electric organ and it fitted in with the punkiness of their garage sound.”

(Image: Ian Rook 2014)

We’re revisiting those days because its the rawness of that garage rock sound they say they’ve recaptured on their forthcoming, currently eponymous new album - their first in two decades, due for release in September. “The Inspirals moved on massively, doing all these big hits,” Stephen reflects, “but the way we’re playing, rehearsing and recording is very much in the vein of Dung 4.

“It’s weird talking about all the time away - it’s felt so natural coming back in that it’s almost like it is just 1988. It’s almost odd that I wasn’t around for 20 or more years.”

Clint agrees. “The moment Stephen rejoined the band I was aware we were that garage band again. The new album sounds exactly like that band 27 years after, like the big brother of Dung 4.

“We can also say there’s a collaboration we’ve done that when people hear about it they’ll be knocked out by who it is and how good it is. It’s not an obvious one. Watch this space - cos it’s an exciting one.

“There’s a lot of optimism and looking forward to the future on the record,” Clint adds. “I’ve only written one song on it, Craig’s written his first song, Martin’s done a few and Stephen’s done a few. It’s forward thinking and full of confidence... although there probably are a few ‘upset with your wife’ love songs.”

Stephen laughs. “We’ve got a few darker edges.”

Highlighting that will be a video they’re filming for album’s first single at Gorton Monastery (“It’ll just be live, we’re not going to pretend to be monks or owt like that,” Clint laughs). And after that, a gig at Band On The Wall on June 6, already sold out in a record 15 minutes and a special one for Clint who went to his first Manchester gigs there - “aged 17, coming down from Oldham, lining up outside a bit nervous because I’d told my mum and dad I was going somewhere safe and I’d actually gone to Manchester to watch some punk bands, school blazer turned inside out with all the safety pins on the inside” - but has never played the venue.

Tours of the UK, and possibly America, will follow - two shows at The Ritz look likely. “I can’t say this is the best album we’ve ever made, but I can say it’s the best album we can make at this point: bearing in mind how old we are, how many kids we’ve got, what other careers we’ve got outside of it, nobody throwing loads of money at it,” Clint enthuses. “I defy anyone to write a better album.”