RAMSEY COUNTY, MN — Police say a man grabbed a woman's butt cheek and masturbated in front of her and two children while at the Minnesota State Fair's CHS Miracle of Birth Center. The Ramsey County Attorney's Office Tuesday charged Jeffrey Pendzimas, 62, with two counts of criminal sexual conduct in the fifth degree in connection with an incident at the Minnesota State Fair Monday afternoon.

According to the criminal complaint, a woman, 31, who had been watching chickens hatch at the CHS Miracle of Birth Center with her son and nephew, felt a hand reach into her shorts from the bottom. The hand squeezed the skin of the woman's butt cheek in a cupping motion, the complaint states.

The woman turned around and made eye contact with Pendzimas, thinking it was an accident, according to police. Authorities say the woman moved away before she turned and looked at Pendzimas who was standing right behind her.

The woman saw Pendzimas making up and down motion with his hands as if he were playing with himself, according to the complaint. Pendzimas then allegedly lifted his shirt exposing his penis which he actively stroked while it was sticking out of his zipper.

The complaint states the woman covered the eyes of her son and nephew, who had turned in Pendzimas' direction, and screamed at the top of her lungs, "What are you doing? That man has his penis out!" Pendzimas turned around and fled, according to police.



The woman told officers she would definitely be able to identify the man were she to see him again. An officer later turned Pendzimas to face the woman, who said, "Yes, that is the sick f--- that showed me his small penis." The woman later told police that the two children with her had seen Pendzimas masturbating, according to the criminal complaint.



Pendzimas will make his first appearance Wednesday afternoon in Ramsey County District Court in Saint Paul, according to a news release.

Read the entire criminal complaint below:

(For more local news, click here to sign up for real-time news alerts and newsletters from Minnesota Patch, click here to find your local Minnesota Patch. Also, follow us on Facebook , and if you have an iPhone, click here to get the free Patch iPhone app.)

Image via Ramsey County Sheriff's Office