DOVER, Del. - A police officer-involved shooting in Dover caused tensions to rise Friday afternoon mainly because of where the shooting happened. Witnesses told WBOC that the shooting occurred very close to a daycare center with young children inside.

During a press conference, Police Chief Paul Bernat identified the man who was shot as 21-year-old Terrence Fletcher. Chief Bernat said Fletcher was shot in the thigh by a Dover Police officer following a brief police chase in the area of South Governors Avenue and South New Street. Chief Bernat said Fletcher was armed with a handgun at the time, and that weapon was later recovered. Fletcher was treated at Kent General Hospital with a gunshot wound to the thigh that police described as a "flesh wound." At the time of the news conference, Chief Bernat added that Fletcher was in good condition.

Police say they responded to the area around 1 p.m. Friday after they received a tip of a suspect with a handgun in the area of the 100 block of South New Street, which is near a daycare and its outside playground. When officers arrived on scene, police say they saw the suspect, later identified as Fletcher, as being the person in possession of a firearm. As officers approached him, they say he took off through a narrow alleyway towards Governors Avenue, where other officers were located as a staging area. As Fletcher ran towards the officers on Governors Avenue, that’s when police say a Dover Police officer fired his weapon, striking Fletcher in the upper thigh.

Fletcher was charged with carrying a concealed deadly weapon and possession of a firearm by a prohibited person, according to police. He is being held on $20,000 cash bond.

Chief Bernat said the officer involved in the shooting is a three year veteran of the Dover Police Department and a member of the Street Crimes Unit. Bernat added that the officer, who has not been identified, is on administrative leave with pay pending the outcome of the investigation, which is department protocol.

WBOC on the scene reported a large crowd in the area following the incident. Police officers from Smyrna, Milford, Capitol, and Delaware State Police Departments responded to assist with the crowd. Police say two people were arrested for disorderly conduct and other charges as a result. The majority of the crowd dispersed peacefully a short time later.

WBOC spoke with Dover Mayor Robin Christiansen who said he told people that violence in response to this event will not be tolerated. He added the city is working with the Interdenominational Ministerial Alliance, the leaders of churches in the African-American community, to help calm the community's reaction.

The leaders say they are hosting a meeting Saturday for the community to express concerns and thoughts about violence, jobs, resources and other issues in the neighborhood. The meeting will be held at the Center of Faith church on New St. at 6pm on Saturday Aug. 29.