The Nature of What Religion Demands

In this post I shall describe the most important and critical demands of religion. Once this has been done one would have little difficulty understanding why fighting religion is a worthy cause.

The religions’ main interest lies in the contents of one’s skull as well as underwear. Religion has great interest in those areas and commands the believer:

THOU SHALT USE NEITHER OF THEM.

( Finding the your way to your place of worship and molesting under age kids are among the few exception that the Gods of desert were kind enough to make)

Religion exclusively relies on faith to justify itself. This means to exempt its claim from being investigated by means of scientific method and philosophical inquiry. Religion demands the believer to believe and not to question. It requires full slavery and submission of one’s faculty of reasoning. It’s impossible for a believer to question any of the claims of his/her religion. The moment that one has dared to question any of the mad claims of religion, is the moment in which one has made himself/herself qualified for eternal damnation. The utter feeling of guilt would dominate one’s mind if one is to commit an act which has some flavours of heresy. This is the key to survival of religion. Once one decides to rationally examine the arrogant, false, absurd, ridiculous and barbaric claims that three monotheistic dogmas make, it’d be inevitable to reach the conclusion that the very fundamental doctrines of these dogmas are nothing but barking mad.

Another major problem with religion is to dress one of the most vicious vices as a virtue, that is to make the false claim that celibacy, or at least chastity, is a virtue. This is because Big Brother wants your love. He wants you to dedicate your entire love to him and not to anyone else. He demands you to be the only thing that is truly loved. As Orwell said, “It’s not enough to obey the Big Brother you must love him” . Religion demands all of one’s love to be dedicated to the blood thirsty God of desert and no one else is to compete for it. This explains religions’ obsession with celibacy and its failure to condemn rape, since rape is a violent act and involves no love, so in the eye of the God of desert it’s the perfect method for reproduction. This is among the many reasons why each time I hear the name of any of the main theistic dogmas I run the risk of choking on my own vomit.

The way that religion has poisoned the attitude of society towards sex is also of great importance. I will, however, refrain from discussing it as it can’t be said better than how Bertrand Russell explains in his “Why I’m not a Christian”.

The price of what religion asks for is simply too high, and we can’t afford paying it. A society in which everyone thinks the same and there is no love for our fellow human beings would be too similar to Orwell’s nightmare vision of “1984” .

Advertisements