Approximately 10,000 Muslims were expected to show up to a “peace march” in Cologne, Germany on Saturday. Guess how many showed up? A couple hundred at most. Organizers hoped that an event featuring slogans like “Together against terror” and “Hatred makes the earth hell” would galvanize the so-called “peaceful Muslims” we’ve all been hearing so much about from the Left. In the wake of a wave of terror attacks across major cities in Europe, one would expect some solidarity with the victims, perhaps a few words of condemnation against violent jihad. Instead, a couple hundred people, many of whom were not Muslim, showed up to an underwhelming event that could hardly be called a “march.”

“The turnout was far fewer than the tens of thousands the organizers expected — Germany’s biggest Islamic association had said earlier in the week that it wouldn’t take part in the march,” reports Euronews.

Rather than standing up for victims, Germany’s Islamic community appears to have been more concerned about its PR image.

“The Turkish-Islamic Union argued it would send the wrong signal by suggesting that international terrorism is mainly a Muslim problem,” notes ABC News. “It also said Muslims observing the Ramadan fast couldn't be expected to march for hours in summer temperatures. That stance drew criticism from the government, which welcomed the march.”

The disturbing lack of solidarity with terror attacks comes as German voters debate the the costs and benefits of Chancellor Angela Merkel’s open-borders migration.

During Merkel’s reign, Germany has suffered from a series of refugee-initiated attacks, from Berlin to Munich to Bavaria.

In Cologne, where the 10,000-strong “peace march” was supposed to take place, a barbaric attack against the city’s women was perhaps the most visible sign of post-Muslim migration social dysfunction.

On New Year’s Eve 2016, 1,000 young Muslim men targeted and assaulted dozens of German women during the evening’s festivities. “German authorities said on Tuesday that coordinated attacks in which young women were sexually harassed and robbed by hundreds of young men on New Year’s Eve in the western city of Cologne were unprecedented in scale and nature,” reported The New York Times. “The assault, which went largely unreported for days, set off a national outcry after the Cologne police described the attackers as young men ‘who appeared to have a North African or Arabic’ background, based on testimony from victims and witnesses.”

The attack was coordinated and planned. “Around 1,000 young men arrived in large groups, seemingly with the specific intention of carrying out attacks on women,” added the BBC.

As young and maladaptive Muslim men flooded Germany, crime and assault against women soared. The disturbing sexual warfare against the women in Cologne was just the tip of the iceberg. Coming from cultures and religious backgrounds that neither acknowledge nor respect the human rights of women, hordes of Muslim men, fleeing from the war-torn Middle East, have yet to accept European social norms, or worse, stand up against the Islamic community terrorism problem.