ES News Email Enter your email address Please enter an email address Email address is invalid Fill out this field Email address is invalid You already have an account. Please log in or register with your social account

A 13-year-old boy today completed a challenge to visit all 270 London Underground stations in one day in memory of his older brother who died after a battle with cancer.

Alasdair Clift, from Wirral, Merseyside, took on the "Tube Challenge" to raise money for charity Bloodwise after his brother Adam, 17, died from lymphoma in March.

The teenager began his journey at Chesham station at 5.15am on Monday and finished at Heathrow airport in the early hours of Tuesday, having navigated the entire Underground network.

Alasdair, who is "fascinated" by transport, has so far received more than £11,000 in donations - far exceeding his original target of £100.

After spending nearly 20 hours on the tube with his father, Richard Clift, 50, the schoolboy arrived at Terminal 5 to applause from a welcome party of relatives, Tube staff and police officers shortly before 1am.

Speaking as the achievement sank in, Alasdair said he felt "tired, but proud and happy" for the huge support he had been shown.

He said: "This has been an ambition of mine for a while.

"In 2013 my brother was diagnosed with lymphoma and unfortunately after many rounds of treatment he passed away in March.

"I've done this challenge to hopefully give other people a better chance."

Mr Clift said the kindness shown by fellow travellers and tube workers had been "phenomenal".

He added: "We have had a very warm day on the tube and in terms of feeling shown to us.

"We have had terrific support, with people sticking their heads into the carriages saying how wonderful we are and the Transport for London staff have been right behind us.

"Alasdair felt like a star."

Mr Clift said they had been touched by the "random gestures of complete strangers" who donated along the way.

Alasdair was allowed to ride in the front cab for the first two journeys of his challenge and was given a certificate recognising his achievement from Mark Wild, the managing director of London Underground, at Southwark station.

Mr Clift earlier said he and his wife Caroline, 51, had been "overawed" by Alasdair, who single-handedly arranged the challenge.

"We're very proud - and very proud of his organisation skills because Caroline and I have had absolutely nothing to do with it," he said.

Donations for Alasdair's Tube Challenge can be made through JustGiving at www.justgiving.com/fundraising/Alasdair-Clift

Additional reporting by Press Association.