Get ready for the reunion of your slumber party dreams. On September 26th in Los Angeles, we're teaming up with Alamo Drafthouse and Birth.Movies.Death. to celebrate a new vinyl reissue of the JOSIE AND THE PUSSYCATS Original Motion Picture Soundtrack by getting the band back to together. And we do mean literally.

The epic reunion screening tailor-made for superfans of the smart, funny and legitimately rocking 2001 film will unspool at LA’s famed Ace Hotel. In person, it’s the film’s brilliant co-directors/writers Harry Elfont and Deborah Kaplan, along with Josie and Alan M. themselves, stars Rachael Leigh Cook and Gabriel Mann. PLUS singer Kay Hanley, front woman of ‘90s band Letters to Cleo and Josie’s singing voice in the film (no wonder that soundtrack is so killer).

Before the film, Kay and the band will *actually* rock the house with a set of JOSIE AND THE PUSSYCATS songs. You read that right. Yes, this is real life. And, after the credits roll that night, the whole gang will be live on stage answering your burning questions.

Tragically under-appreciated on its original release, JOSIE AND THE PUSSYCATS was dismissed as just another lame comic-to-screen cash-in aimed squarely at teens (who couldn’t have cared less). But the film was actually a cinematic Trojan horse, a scathing satire on consumerism, pop music and the very genre of comic-to-screen teen movies. And, thanks to a cracking script, an all-star cast giving it their all, and a soundtrack that’s way more rocking than it had any right to be, JOSIE is an enduring big screen pleasure.

And of course, our vinyl edition of the soundtrack will be available for purchase at the theater.



“Re-issuing the soundtrack to JOSIE AND THE PUSSYCATS has been a holy grail for us,” says Mo Shafeek, Mondo Record Label Manager. “Even though the band doesn't technically exist, it falls on our list of essential debut albums and deserves to be treated as such. It is an absolute honor to reissue it on vinyl for the first time ever.”

So what are you waiting for? Grab your tickets to this totally jerkin’ night. Cat ears optional, but entirely encouraged.

Tickets to JOSIE AND THE PUSSYCATS at the Ace Hotel are on sale now. Get yours here.