Why investing crypto in a piece of Picasso makes sense.

Maecenas Blocked Unblock Follow Following Sep 8, 2017

At a time of mounting regulatory pressure on the crypto finance, the fine art market can provide a safe storage of value. Maecenas connects the two worlds and simultaneously makes fine art personally accessible to the people.

The crypto world has been recently subject to increasing regulation, especially the parts that provide liquidity to the market. Putting a lid on the source of liquidity in this market means increased volatility, in an already extremely volatile world, and price instability. Art is different. That’s why Maecenas is providing a bridge between the unstable but expanding crypto financial world and the safe haven of art.

Safer than stocks

Fine art is one of the most stable and profitable investments by far, even compared to the historically lucrative S&P 500 stock index, as can be plainly seen from the chart below.

Contemporary art has outperformed stocks in the last decade. A large majority of collectors buy art for investment.

Unlike in traditional art trading, buying a share in paintings on a Maecenas’ platform brings with it high liquidity. You can switch from a Picasso to a Monet in hours instead of months, with small shares being treated the same as large. By using the power of blockchain, you also get the peace of mind that the artwork you own is truly authentic and well-protected, at no additional costs to you.

Your contribution will also help small art galleries in your city to gain access to classical masterpieces, so you can be amazed by a Salvador Dalí in person and tell your friends you own a piece of the most famous paintings ever created. Maecenas will deliver transparency in the opaque world of art trading and enable small communities to disrupt a monopolised world that has been historically dominated only by well-heeled customers.

Simply put, the more people get involved in buying smaller pieces of art, the easier it will be to bring art back to the people. Where it belongs.

If you want to help make fine art accessible to everyone, contribute to Maecenas now to bring the best fine art masterpieces to the blockchain community, and tell your art-loving friends about Maecenas.