Winston-Salem trounced Durham 10-0 without an exchange of blows Tuesday after a bench-clearing brawl Monday left one player hospitalized.

Ten players were ejected following the brawl Monday night, which was “Strike Out Domestic Violence” night at the Durham Bulls Athletic Park.

Warthogs pitcher Glen Cullop lost several teeth and was knocked unconscious during the brawl. He was listed in stable condition Tuesday at Durham Regional Hospital.

League president John Hopkins said it was still too early to discuss what action the league will take.

“I’ve only just received the report from the umpires,” Hopkins said. “I’ll be there tonight to talk to the teams. We’ll just have to see what happens after that.

“I will say this - both managers are extremely concerned about the incident and I have confidence that they will use their influence to try to prevent a recurrence.”

Winston-Salem’s Curt Lyons pitched seven innings for the victory Tuesday, and Gulls left-hander Del Mathews took the loss.

Monday’s brawl began after Durham’s John Knott was hit by a pitch from Jason Kummerfeldt and charged the mound with two out in the bottom of the third.

Kummerfeldt already had hit Danny Magee in the first and had given up consecutive homers before hitting Knott on the left arm. In the top of third, Bulls pitcher Jamie Arnold had hit Aaron Boone of Winston-Salem.

“They had it coming,” Knott said. “I could tell that the guy intentionally threw at Danny Magee in the first inning.”

Kummerfeldt denied hitting the Bulls intentionally.

“I had no control and no command of my pitches,” he said. “I kept trying to go inside. I hate the fact that I hit three or four batters, or whatever it was.”

Hopkins said a similar incident prompted by batters being hit with pitches occurred last year in a game between Wilmington and Salem.

“There were fines and suspensions for those involved, as there probably will be in this case,” he said. “I just don’t know who was involved and to what degree.”

Hopkins said the minimum penalty for a player who leaves his position and becomes involved in a confrontation on the field is a two-game suspension and $100 fine.

The brawl delayed the game 32 minutes.

Winston-Salem won 10-8.