WNT

CHICAGO (February 8, 2017) – U.S. Women’s National Team head coach Jill Ellis has named 25 players to a training camp roster prior to the 2017 SheBelieves Cup that will feature the USA, Germany, France and England playing in three doubleheader events at three different venues over a seven-day period in what promises to be highly competitive and entertaining matches.

“January gave us a chance to see some new faces in with the veterans, and get some quality time on the training field,” Ellis said. “A player’s performance in that camp and positional depth guided our selection for this pre-camp, and from here we will select our SheBelieves Cup roster. There will be no better test than opening against Germany, so we will need to have a laser focus as soon as we land in Orlando. As our players have not yet returned to their clubs, they have been training in their independent environments, so playing as much 11v11 situations will again be critical during these few days,” Ellis added.

U.S. Women’s National Team Roster by Position:

GOALKEEPERS (3): Jane Campbell (Houston Dash), Ashlyn Harris (Orlando Pride), Alyssa Naeher (Chicago Red Stars)

DEFENDERS (7): Julie Johnston (Chicago Red Stars), Meghan Klingenberg (Portland Thorns FC), Ali Krieger (Orlando Pride), Kelley O’Hara (Sky Blue FC), Becky Sauerbrunn (FC Kansas City), Casey Short (Chicago Red Stars), Emily Sonnett (Portland Thorns FC)

MIDFIELDERS (9): Morgan Brian (Houston Dash), Tobin Heath (Portland Thorns FC), Lindsey Horan (Portland Thorns FC), Sarah Killion (Sky Blue FC), Rose Lavelle (Boston Breakers), Carli Lloyd (Houston Dash), Allie Long (Portland Thorns FC), Samantha Mewis (NC Courage), Brianna Pinto (CASL)

FORWARDS (6): Crystal Dunn (Chelsea Ladies FC), Alex Morgan (Olympique Lyonnais), Christen Press (Chicago Red Stars), Mallory Pugh (UCLA), Amy Rodriguez (FC Kansas City), Lynn Williams (NC Courage)

Breaking Down the SheBelieves Cup Schedule

The U.S. team will convene in Orlando, Florida on Feb. 20 for a week of training before heading to Philadelphia to kick off the 2nd annual edition of the tournament on Wednesday, March 1 at Talen Energy Stadium. England will open against France in Chester, Pa. (4 p.m. ET) followed by the USA against Germany (7 p.m. ET on FS1).

All the teams will then travel to New Jersey where France will face Germany on Saturday, March 4 (2:15 p.m. ET) followed by the USA taking on England (5 p.m. ET on FOX) at Red Bull Arena in Harrison. The tournament will finish on Tuesday, March 7, at the historic RFK Stadium in Washington, D.C. as Germany takes on England (4 p.m. ET) and the USA faces France (7 p.m. ET on FS1).

SheBelieves Cup Tickets

Tickets for all three doubleheaders are on sale through ussoccer.com. Tickets can also be purchased by phone at 1-800-298-4200 for the event in Pennsylvania and 1-800-745-3000 for the matchups in New Jersey and Washington. Ticket office hours at Talen Energy Stadium are Monday-Friday, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., while the Red Bull Arena ticket office is open Monday-Friday, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. [Note: Tickets are not sold at RFK Stadium except on the day of the event.] Groups of 20 or more can be ordered at ussoccer.com.

#SheBelievesHero Contest

The U.S. Women’s National Team announced the launch of the SheBelieves Hero contest ahead of the 2017 SheBelieves Cup. The contest, which runs from Feb. 7-10, aims to find a girl between the ages of 13-17 who embodies the SheBelieves spirit.

Conceived and developed by the U.S. Women’s National Team players, SheBelieves is a movement to inspire young girls and women and encourage them to accomplish their goals and dreams, athletic or otherwise. The campaign was originally launched in the run-up to the 2015 FIFA Women’s World Cup but has since evolved and grown into a special bond between the team and its fans, taking its powerful message of empowerment and that of believing in yourself into communities across the nation.

Additional Notes: