We thought we couldn't be more excited about Christmas Day - turkey! presents! booze! - and then we found out about The Great Christmas Bake Off.

Bake Off might be heading to Channel 4 soon, but not before Paul Hollywood, Mary Berry and Mel & Sue hit our screens together for one last time for a celebration of all things Christmas.

The two episodes - which will air on Christmas Day and Boxing Day - will each feature four returning contestants, and now we know who they are.

Love Productions/Mark Bourdillon BBC

And, brilliantly, one of them is absolute Bake Off fave, series five's Norman Calder. Hooray for Norman!

He'll feature in the first episode along with series two finalist Mary-Anne Boermans, series three's Cathryn Dresser and series four's Ali Imdad.

Love Productions/Tom Graham BBC

But just because it's Christmas, don't expect the challenges to be easy: Mary and Paul will be setting three yuletide tests that are bound to be tricksy, including a signature challenge requiring intricate icing, a technical challenge involving chocolate snowflakes and a showstopper demanding a "festive masterpiece".

We're salivating already, to be honest.

And then in the second episode, more favourites will be back as series two's Janet Basu, series three's James Morton, series four's Howard Middleton and series five's Chetna Makan battle it out to be the Christmas champion.

Love Productions/Tom Graham BBC

But the real question is... WILL SOMEONE NICK HOWARD'S CUSTARD AGAIN?!

Well, we're not sure custard will actually be on the menu - we're promised a savoury signature and Paul's setting a tricky bread technical. But the showstopper requires the bakers to make a trio of Christmas favourites, so perhaps there is room for custard redemption after all.

Episode one of The Great Christmas Bake Off will air on Christmas Day at 4.45pm, while episode two will be served up at 7pm on Boxing Day - all on BBC One.

And if watching the shows gets you all fired up to prove your prowess with an oven, you're in luck, as applications are now open for the first Channel 4 series of Bake Off. We dare you.

Want up-to-the-minute entertainment and tech news? Just hit 'Like' on our Digital Spy Facebook page and 'Follow' on our @digitalspy Twitter account and you're all set.