Share. A new report out of Japan outlines what Nintendo's approach to mobile could be. A new report out of Japan outlines what Nintendo's approach to mobile could be.

For years, there have been calls for Nintendo to bring its games to smartphones -- calls which have only intensified in light of its recent adjustments to sales projections for both Wii U and 3DS. According to a new report, Nintendo will soon announce plans to leverage mobile devices, but not in the manner some believe it should.

According to a Japanese consulting firm, Japanese publication Nikkei reports Nintendo will release videos and playable mini-games on mobile devices intended to promote its games. In other words, it would release content meant to encourage people to buy Nintendo hardware, which will remain the only place to play the full versions of its software. These mobile releases wouldn't be full or free-to-play games; they would simply be limited demos released free of charge. (Nintendo subsidiary The Pokemon Company already has an iOS app -- the official Pokédex app -- available for download).

Exit Theatre Mode

The plans for this initiative could be announced as soon as this week's quarterly financial briefing, which is scheduled for this Wednesday.

The company has already stated more than once that it doesn't believe the proliferation of smartphones and tablets means there is no longer a market for console and handheld games. Just recently, CEO Satoru Iwata said this "doesn't mean that we should put Mario on smartphones." That statement doesn't preclude the possibility of using mobile devices in some way, but this new report hardly satisfies the many questions it raises. For instance, it's unclear just how Nintendo would create demo versions of its games on platforms lacking physical buttons or the second screens that distinguish 3DS and Wii U from other platforms.

Earlier this month, Nintendo slashed its forecast for the current fiscal year, which runs through March 31, 2014. The 3DS is now expected to sell 13.5 million units (down from the previous projection of 18 million), and the Wii U is expected to sell only 2.8 million units (down from a projection of 9 million). This announcement resulted in a hit to Nintendo's stock price. Iwata, who has been CEO since 2002, has stated he will not resign.

Stay tuned to IGN this week for the latest news regarding Nintendo's plans for the future.

Chris Pereira is a freelance writer who spends his spare time agonizing over the final seasons of The X-Files. Check out what he's saying on Twitter and follow him on IGN.