The new Global Brand Ambassador of Revlon spills the beans on her beauty must-haves

Photos: Revlon

We’re sad to see you leave The Voice. What else have you been up to lately?

I’ve been working on new music, which I’m so excited to release this year. I can’t say too much about it just yet, but I’ve had so much fun in the studio. My cartoon series, Kuu Kuu Harajuku on Nickelodeon is going into season 2 and will be available worldwide. The Kuu Kuu Harajuku toy series is launching in US, Canada, Australia and Israel in July/ August this year.

You’ve been the face for various beauty brands previously. What made you decide to take on the role of ambassador for Revlon?

I don’t even know how to absorb such an incredible honor. It’s such a big deal. I can’t believe I get to be a Revlon ambassador, especially at this point in my life. I’ve always been a fan of Revlon. As a little girl, going to the drug store and going down the makeup aisle, was one of my favorite things to do, ever. And now that I get to indulge in every single product that Revlon make and be part of such an incredibly creative company with such a positive message, it makes me feel so honored.

Take us through your morning routine, what is it like?

There is no typical “routine” for me. Every day I get up in the morning and I wash my face and put on some moisturizer. I literally and genuinely love doing makeup so there is no one beauty look that I typically stick to.

What are five things that we will find in your makeup bag?

I genuinely love doing makeup and experimenting with different looks, so there is no one beauty product that I typically stick to. On some days, I could wear brows and lips and that would be it. The Revlon ColorStay Brow Crayon is quick and easy to use and it stays put all day. I love a bold lip. Today, I’m wearing the red shade I wore on my last shoot, which was

Today, I’m wearing the red shade I wore on my last shoot, which was Revlon’s Super Lustrous Love That Red. I always need to have something for my lips. I think that’s probably one of the most important things for me. I’m a fan of the new Revlon Mega Multiplier Mascara. It really creates and oversized lash look and is water resistant, which is perfect for my busy lifestyle. The Revlon 2 IN 1 Kajal Eyeliner has a great angled tip and there’s a smudger on the other side which makes doing your eyeliner quick and easy.

You’re known for your iconic bold red lipstick. Which is your go-to shade?

I think that when I wear red lipstick I feel a little bit more animated. A little bit more drama. A little bit more confidence and uniqueness. For years, I was always scared of an orange red. I really went towards a blue red and classic reds. But now, I feel like I’ve become more adventurous and I really love every single shade of red. Today, I’m wearing the red shade I wore on my last shoot, which was Revlon’s Super Lustrous Love That Red.

Any advice on pulling off red lips?

I’m so used to wearing red lipstick now, but I have a friend who constantly licks her lips and I always tell her that she can’t do that when she’s wearing a bright lip. Finding the right longwearing lipstick is obviously crucial.

Which feature do you prefer: lips or eyes?

Lips.

If you had to live forever with only one beauty product, which would it be?

Lipstick.

You’ve always said that makeup helps boost your own confidence. How did this philosophy come about?

The philosophy came about from the truth of how I feel when I get to be creative with makeup. It’s just something that I’ve always been passionate about. I’m just speaking for myself that when I get my makeup on daily, it definitely boosts my confidence. And when I get my makeup on before I go on stage, it’s definitely a ritual that takes to a place I’m able to get up on stage and exchange love with people.