Manga, comics and art book publisher UDON had plenty to announce at San Diego Comic Con including the Kill La Kill manga and impressive selection of new art book licenses.

Udon is commitment to the Street Fighter comics series with new hardcover editions have announced that Super Street Fighter V2 is almost complete.

They've also announced that the Street Fighter World Warrior Encyclopedia that will coming next year. The reprint feature new material Ultra and included brand new artwork.

And speaking of Capcom, they've announced that The Art of Phoenix Wright Ace Attorney: Dual Destinies is coming in 2015.

UDON has also secured the rights for the English-language edition of the Kill la Kill manga, which will be released in 2015

Upcoming Manga Classics include

The Scarlet Letter by Nathaniel Hawthorne

- Great Expectations by Charles Dickens

- Emma by Jane Austen

Two new titles appearing in December 2014:

- Katamari Volume 1 the collected ShiftyLook comic by Alex Culang and Raynato Castro

- Makeshift Miracle Volume 2: The Boy Who Stole Everything by Jim Zub and Shun Hong Chan

Record of Agarest War: Heroines Visual Book and Record of Agarest War 2: Heroines Visaul Book

Shining Blade and Ark, featuring the amazing work of Tony Taka! This title collections the artwork of the Shining Blade and Shining Ark games, and is UDON’s forth title in the Shining series.

Yu-Gi-Oh Dual Art collects the artwork of Takahashi Kazuki from the Yu-Gi-Oh series, including card art, personal illustrations, manga illustrations and more.

Osamu Tezuka art books!!! Osamu Tezuka Anime Character Sketchbook is an unprecedented look into the sketchbook drawings and designs of this master artist; Osamu Tezuka Anime Character Illustrations is a unique collection of character model sheets and animations spanning his impressive body of work.

UDON will be producing an English-language version of the Professor Layton Official Fanbook, published by Level 5 and QBIST in Japan.

Gungnir Official Art Chronicle is based on an epic Norse-inspired JRPG and is part of the “Dept. of Heaven” series.

Border Break Artworks, UDON’s first full-on mecha art book! Chock full of schematics, sketches, pilot designs and background materials

Finally, they announced plans for Robotech/Macross art books More details to come soon.

.@UdonEnt at #sdcc - comic-coen debut editions of SF25: the art of street fighter & Udon's art of Capcom pic.twitter.com/mhRxtTRiDo — Deb Aoki (@debaoki) July 27, 2014

.@UdonEnt at #sdcc - The Art of Phoenix Wright - Ace Attorney: Dual Destinies - coming 2015! pic.twitter.com/wUPnnTC01H — Deb Aoki (@debaoki) July 27, 2014

.@UdonEnt at #sdcc - Katamari Damacy comics by Alex Culang & Raynato Castro (buttersafe) - part of shiftylook comix pic.twitter.com/jUw2EfFtuL — Deb Aoki (@debaoki) July 27, 2014

.@UdonEnt at #sdcc - Katamari Damacy comics by Alex Culang & Raynato Castro (buttersafe) - part of shiftylook comix pic.twitter.com/jUw2EfFtuL — Deb Aoki (@debaoki) July 27, 2014

.@UdonEnt at #sdcc - New artbook license: Yu Gi Oh Duel Art: Art of Takahashi Kazuki - 2015 pic.twitter.com/dQsGT3dqDD — Deb Aoki (@debaoki) July 27, 2014

------

Scott Green is editor and reporter for anime and manga at geek entertainment site Ain't It Cool News. Follow him on Twitter at @aicnanime.