Dublin Airport has had its fair share of mysterious finds

A headstone with the inscription "You will never be forgotten", a toilet seat and cistern, and a live turtle are among the more bizarre items left behind by passengers at Dublin Airport.

Despite the epitaph "you will always be remembered, never forgotten", the owner of the headstone seemingly forgot all about their dearly departed and misplaced the memorial at the drop-off point to the departures area at Terminal One a few years ago, according to DAA spokeswoman Audrey O'Hagan.

A toilet seat and cistern were also found abandoned at the departures entrance in the airport.

A life-size mannequin, human ashes, false teeth and a glass eye were also items consigned to the airport's lost and found section, where they can be reclaimed within a year.

A large of number of abandoned crutches and wheelchairs have also wound up in the lost and found, leading airport staff to wonder whether "some miraculous recoveries have taken place within the terminals", according to Ms O'Hagan.

Boulder

The DAA's listing of items recently left and available for collection for a limited time also raise some interesting questions about who has been passing through the gates.

A "brown envelope" was left behind by a passenger on July 14, while a set of "cast iron dungeon keys" was found on June 11.

One passenger attempted to transport a large boulder from an Irish beach as a souvenir for their garden, even though it weighed a hefty 15kgs and could have been used as a weapon.

A large anchor chain link was also taken off another passenger for similar reasons, while chainsaws and angle grinders have been consigned to checked-in luggage for security reasons.

While airport staff are used to seeing pretty much everything go through the X-ray scanner, they were taken aback when a passenger tried to take a kitchen sink in their hand luggage, Ms O'Hagan said.

A passenger tried to get on a flight with a live turtle in their pocket, finally handing it back unharmed to a family member who was not flying.