Aniplex's Ani-Com magazine published the first 50 items in a 100 question survey, filled out by Madoka, in December 2010. The second section, containing questions 51-100, was distributed in Comike. Aniplex announced at the US Madoka premiere that additional surveys for other characters will be posted on the official website in the future.

The survey mostly concerns mundane things -- what do you wear when you go to bed, are you left-handed or right-handed, have you ever been confessed to, etc.

# Question Answer

1 Please tell us your name. My name is Madoka Kaname.

2 When is your birthday? October 3.

3 Your blood type? I'm type A.

4 Please tell us your three sizes? Huh?! I-I-I've never taken them before...

5 Tell us about your family composition? It's four people, with my dad, mom, and little brother.

6 What's your occupation? I'm a middle-school student.

7 Your favorite food? Um...my favorite food...is cream stew, I think.

8 Favorite animal? I love anything that's small and fluffy!

9 Favorite subject? Hm...art, maybe...?

10 Dislike subject? Science, English, Chemistry, and...I'm not great at Phys-Ed either.

11 Is there a boy you've been thinking about? My brother Tatsuya is so naughty I can't take my eyes off of him...

12 Do you enjoy school? It's lots of fun!

13 Are you in any school clubs? Yes, I'm in both the Gardening and Crafts Clubs.

14 What's your motto? Um, "one good dine a day"? (TL note: 一日一膳 (ichinichi ichizen, literally "one bowl of rice a day") is a pun on "one good deed a day" [一日一善, ichinichi ichizen])

15 Your special skills? I'm never late for school no matter how I late I oversleep!

16 Tell us about your treasure? Toreho-kun, the first stuffed animal I won from a UFO catcher by myself.

17 Describe yourself in a single Kanji? Um, Madoka? (TL note: 円 [reads: en, mado(ka)] means "circle")

18 Your forte? Umm… not picky about food?

19 Your shortcomings? There are too many of them, I can't list…

20 Places in your memories? I took a great tumble in front of a station since the start of semester… I can never forgot that…

21 What is your favorite drink? Hot chocolate by Papa! It's very delicious!

22 How good can you swim? I… I can swim a bit in breaststroke. Most called it a dog paddle, though….

23 Your timing in 50-meter race? Less than ten seconds! I'm not lying!

24 Your hobby or obsession? Recently a dull joke with Sayaka-chan.

25 Disliked food? I've never seen it, but I don't like something like locust tsukudani…

26 Anything you want to most currently? Um, an iPod, I think it's cool.

27 Afraid of heights? If it is the rooftop of the school building, I love it!

28 Dislike thunder? I'm fine with it if I'm in my own room.

29 Rainy or sunny? I think sunny is better.

30 Do you use pencil or a mechanical pencil in school? Normally mechanical pencil.

31 What do you eat for breakfast? A lot everyday. My Papa can cook anything!

32 Do you believe in ghosts? D…don't talk about scary things!

33 Can you play any musical instruments? Recorder, yes, a bit…

34 Are you the outdoor or indoor type? Anywhere, as long I'm with my friends.

35 Ever in quarrel your brother? He's only 4 years old. I don't think we ever quarrel…

36 Do you have a cellphone? Yes, I do.

37 How long is your commute to school? About 15 minutes if I'm hurried.

38 Do you have more friends than most? Um, about average, I think….

39 Your favorite sports? I'm moved by everything I watch in the Olympics.

40 How good can you cook? Even though my Papa teaches me, I'm not very good at it….

41 Favorite colors? White, I think. Also pink.

42 Anything that you can never forgive? Impersonation phone scams! I think it is bad! (Impersonated phone scams, also known as Ore Ore Sagi, オレオレ詐欺)

43 How tall are you? I'll definitely be 150cm tall by next year!

44 Shoe size? It is 22. (Equivalent of US Misses' 5.5)

45 Your dreams? Um, I want to take a trip around the world…

46 Do you have any marriage desires? Would be nice if I can find a cool husband like [that resembles] my Mama...

47 Do you dislike hot drinks? It is okay if I blow on it.

48 Do you like bitter coffee? I will refrain from it until I'm adult.

49 Bed time? Up until 11 PM.

50 Wake up time? I set my alarm clock at 7 AM.

51 When you sleep, are you a bed person or a futon person? We use beds at my house.

52 Are you confident in your ability to concentrate? Not really...

53 Do you have any tips on losing weight? It's all about holding back on those second helpings... I guess?

54 Between warm soba and chilled soba, which do you like? I like them both!

55 Tell us which arm is your dominant arm. The one on the right, as you'd expect.

56 Tell us about something lucky that's happened lately. The other day, I got a heart-shaped Pino for the first time!

57 Tell us about something unlucky that's happened lately. This morning, I got stopped twice by the automatic turnstile...

58 What's the name of your school anthem? "Oh Beautiful Mitakihara"

59 What's your favorite flower? I like tulips and gerbera flowers.

60 What's your favorite saying? Um...one good dine a day?

61 What's your favorite four-kanji phrase? Mm....probably 'one good dine a day'! If I have at least one cup of tea with every meal, I'll be fine! ...that's kind of what I mean, you know?

62 What comes to mind when you think about spring? Hmm, probably sakura-mochi! [a rice cake with bean paste, wrapped in cherry leaf]

63 And summer? Uh, shaved ice!

64 What about fall? Mmmm, sweet potatoes!

65 And then the winter? Apple pie! ...huh? All the things I said were foods?

66 If you had a time machine, where would you go? I think I'd want to see the future.

67 Do you like reading manga or short stories more? If I had to choose, I like manga better.

68 What's your allowance? I get 2,000 yen per month...I'm trying to negotiate for more with Mama!

69 Tell us something a lot of people say about you. They say a lot of people talk about me...but there's no way that's true!

70 What are your hobbies? Um...sketching, or illustrations?

71 Tell us your weight. No way!

72 What are you capable of? [Can be interpreted as 'qualifications' or 'specialties'] Nothing right now, really...

73 What do you wear when you go to bed? Huh? I wear pajamas...

74 Has anyone ever asked you out? When I was in kindergarten, Mitsuru-kun from the Chick class...no, I'm too embarrassed (to tell)!

75 If I told you the world would end tomorrow, what would you do? Don't ask me something so scary...

76 Tell us about your daily routine. When I get dressed in the morning, I talk with my mom...

77 What is something you always carry with you? I always carry a pack of band-aids. I'm really clumsy.

78 Western food? Japanese food? As long as it tastes good, I like it!

79 How do you commute to school? I walk. It's a very fun walk to school!

80 What's the last thing you do before you go to bed at night? I check my hair before going to bed, so when I wake up it won't stick up!

81 What's the first thing you do when you wake up in the morning? I say good morning to Papa, who's usually working in the garden

82 Where are you living right now? I'm living in the suburbs of Mitakihara.

83 What kind of place is it? It's a wonderful house. Dad asked his architect friend to design it, and Mama asked her friend's construction company to come build it.

84 What's the most interesting thing that's happened to you so far? Having a sleepover party at my friend Hitomi's house!

85 What's the saddest thing that's happened to you? When I was little, my pet myna bird died...

86 Do you like roller coasters? I-I'm not really good...with scary things...

87 How's your eyesight? 1.5 in both eyes. But I can't really be happy about it unless it's 2.0...

88 What's your favorite holiday? I like New Year's, because it's fun.

89 What job do you have in school? I'm the nurse's office assistant.

90 What do you do in your free time? I talk with my friends, look up at the sky on the roof...?

91 How long do you study every day? After dinner, I spend about an hour trying my best to study.

92 Who of your friends can you rely on to give you advice? To give advice? I'm always asking them for help...

93 What do you do on the weekends? I hang out with Sayaka and go places with her. And sometimes I help my dad around the house.

94 If you could be reincarnated, what would you want to be? I would want to be Mom and Dad's daughter again!

95 Are the school rules really strict? Nobody likes them, but I don't think I hate them.

96 What do you have for lunch at school? A bento? The school lunch? We have a cafeteria, but I always eat a bento made by my dad.

97 How many friends do you have? The two I really get along with are Sayaka and Hitomi, I guess?

98 Do you take any detours when you go home? There are a lot of interesting things on the path home, like the forest or little streams, so it can be a little problematic...

99 Are you interested in any actors? I'm a big fan of Kiyoshi Hikawa! I'm a terrible singer...