Omar Rodríguez-López Teams Up with Faust for New 10-inch, Releases Bosnian Rainbows Live Record

Published Oct 31, 2013

While Bosnian Rainbows issued their self-titled debut album earlier this year, it should come as no surprise that the band's always active prog explorer Omar Rodríguez-López has another couple of releases to get him through the year. One is a live set from the outfit, and another finds Rodríguez-López jamming it out with Krautrock pioneers Faust . Both arrive November 8 through German imprint Clouds Hill was recorded live at the Clouds Hill premises in Hamburg in 2012, and the 10-inch release features an improvised performance divided into two parts. The track apparently utilizes, among other things, "a chain saw and a jack hammer." The recording is available as a 10-inch on white vinyl and comes with the, which features full-length performances from Bosnian Rainbows, Faust & Omar Rodríguez-López, Gallon Drunk, the Ape, Léonore Boulanger, the Building and Scams.You can watch some of the session with Faust and Rodríguez-López at the bottom of the page.As for the Bosnian Rainbows record, simply called, it features seven live songs recorded on the same day, though the band had then been going under the banner "the Omar Rodríguez-López Group." It's also being pressed up as a 10-inch on white vinyl and comes with the DVD."These are very much shorter, more to-the-point songs [than the Mars Volta's]," Rodríguez-López had said in a statement of Bosnian Rainbows. "They still have spaces that stretch out, but what I mean to say is that it's all the same influences that have been in most of my writing and all the people in my bands' writing — Can is there, Siouxsie and the Banshees is there, Gang of Four is there, all the Led Zeppelin, whatever... all those things are there, it's just different elements of those things."You can pre-order both releases here and see the tracklistings below.Thanks to Modern Vinyl for the tip.1. This Is Not Music, This Is Not Us And We Are Not Here (Part 1)2. This Is Not Music, This Is Not Us And We Are Not Here (Part 2)1. Worthless2. I Cry For You3. Dig Right In Me4. Torn Maps5. Always On The Run6. Red7. The Eye Fell In Love