This woman is truly awful:



I'm hearing from so many women that may not have considered voting for a Republican before, but said, "It's time for the grown-up to come, the man that's going to take this seriously, that's going to take the future of our children very, very seriously."

It's funny how anonymous women keep reporting things to Ann (that she can then report to Mitt so he doesn't have to talk to women directly) that seem, at best, unlikely, and more likely, pulled straight out of her pampered two-Cadillac-driving ass. These women keep telling Ann things that they're not telling anyone else—certainly not the pollsters out there who keep reporting back that women like President Obama much more than they like Mitt Romney; that women trust Obama more than they trust Romney; and that Romney kinda sorta scares the daylights out of them.

But Ann's not talking to those women. She's talking to the ones who think President Obama's not a "grown up"—which, according to my Dogwhistle-to-English dictionary, is a more subtle way of calling a grown black man "boy"—and that the not-grown-up Obama believes the "future of our children" is some laughing matter. If only the pollsters could find those women, Romney's chances might look better than they do.

As Mitt Romney's chief adviser on lady things, she's been reporting back to Mitt on what lady voters supposedly tell her they think, and she's so thrilled and delighted that he listens to her. But Ann doesn't really know what she's talking about, because when the Romney campaign is asked for comment on, say, women—well, gosh, they just cannot find a single "appropriate spokesperson." Suddenly, the nation's foremost confidante of lady voters doesn't have a thing to say.

But here's where Ann once again reveals herself to be just as mean and awkward and insulting as her husband:



I very much believe, Candy, that it's going to be an economic election, and I think a lot of women may be voting, this cycle around, in a different way than they usually are: that is, thinking about the economy, thinking about their own jobs, thinking about their husbands' jobs, but also thinking about the future.

Usually, we lady voters try not to hurt our ladybrains with serious things like the economy or our jobs or the future. We're far more likely to vote based on where we are in our menstrual cycle or whether we're having a good hair day. Sometimes, we just flip a stiletto: heel facing north, we vote Democrat; heel facing south, we vote Republican. After we find a big strong "grown up" man to tell us which way is which because you know how we ladies are with directions.