In my preview for the Battery’s match against Toronto FC II last weekend, I said that the magic number was five… and I was off by one. TFC II had only scored 5 goals all season and the Battery ended up tying their goal total for the entire season in one night with 6 total goals (TFCII scored one to take their total to six).

This was a spectacular game for the Battery for many reasons. They stayed on top of the USL Eastern Conference and, with Louisville and Rochester pressing, Charleston put distance between other teams who have played less games passing them in the standings.

Also the Battery now leads the league in scoring with 34 goals (Real Monarchs sit in 2nd with 33). Super Romario Williams jumped to the top of the individual scoring list with his 12th and 13th goals of the season, and with Dante Marini scoring, the Battery have seen eight different players score this season, six scoring more than once.

The Game

To be honest, Toronto FC II should have never stepped on the same field Saturday night. They did have a few chances in the early going, but they were outplayed for the majority of the match and looked more like a JV squad then a Division II professional squad.

The skill level and physical play of the Battery were way too much for TFC II to handle.

The Battery found the back of the net in the 31st minute when Maikel Chang’s corner found its way to Super Romario Williams, and he finished his 12th goal of the season.

11 minutes later, my Player to Watch Forrest Lasso scored his 6th goal of the season and proved once again that on a set piece against the Battery, you have to find a way to try and shut down Lasso.

Many teams have tried but most have failed and when TFCII couldn’t shut him down they found themselves down 2–0 going into the half.

A Second Half Slaughter

When the second half started, I thought TFC II would come out quickly and try to find a way back into the game, but even if that was the plan, it was not going to happen.

The Battery ended up having one of their best halves of the entire season.

It all started when Super Romario scored his 2nd of the night and league leading 13th for the season in the 51st.

He would end up taking a spot in the USL Team of the Week for the 3rd time this season.

Seven minutes later outside midfielder Dante Marini scored his first goal of the season.

The goal is up for USL Goal of the Week and you can vote HERE and help Dante win!

TFCII would get one goal back in the 68th minute from a beautiful diving header on the back post but it would be the only bright spot on the night for the boys from Canada.

Charleston did not wait long to dash any hopes of a crazy come back. Six minutes after TFCII scored Marini put away his second goal of the night.

This time Super Romario found him for Williams’ 2nd assist of the season. Battery supporters, myself included, are hopeful that Williams’ assist numbers will start to grow quickly as many clubs are starting to double team him in the box. This should open some players up the passing lanes for Williams.

The final nail in the coffin was a beauty! Set piece specialist Justin Portillo stepped up and put away another free kick in stoppage time and when the final whistle blew, the Battery won 6–1.

This was a game every Battery supporter will remember for a while. It is not everyday you go to a soccer match and see seven goals scored.