Which awards are up for grabs, and who is shortlisted? The Best Fifa Men's Player

Three players have been nominated for the award from an initial shortlist of 24. Last year’s winner Cristiano Ronaldo, has scored 45 goals in 48 appearances this calendar year, including 34 goals for club and 11 for country. These incredible individual statistics are bolstered by Ronaldo winning the Champions League and La Liga in the 2016/17 campaign. Lionel Messi is another unsurprising feature within the best player award, with 49 goals and 11 assists in 50 appearances in 2017. The most expensive player in the world, Neymar is the outside bet to be crowned the greatest footballer on earth.

The Best Fifa football coach award

The best coach award is separated into male and female categories.

Juventus boss, Massimiliano Allegri, after winning the league and Coppa Italia last season. Chelsea manager, Antonio Conte, who in his first season in English football won the Premier League, setting a new record along the way achieving 30 wins in a single season. Finally Real Madrid’s Zinedine Zidane makes the list after winning the Champions League and Los Blancos' first league title for five years.

In the women's section, the the top three comprise of Denmark’s manager Nils Nielsen, who guided her side to the final against Holland in this year European Championships. Lyon coach Gerard Precheur is nominated after winning the Champions League, the French League Cup and the French Cup, while Sarina Wiegman also features after leading Holland to the 2017 European championships.

The Best FIFA goalkeeper award

Gianluigi Buffon of Juventus is nominated, having gone 600 minutes without conceding in the Champions League, while Keylor Navas of Real Madrid won his second consecutive Champions League along with a La Liga title. Manuel Neuer makes up the three-man short list.

The Puskas Award

The Puskas award is for the best goal of the year. This year the three finalists include Deyna Castellanos of Venezuela women's side, Olivier Giroud for his goal for Arsenal, below, and South African goalkeeper Oscarine Masuluke.