Toyota had publicly defended its global communications chief and acknowledged it must do a better job of helping foreign executives integrate into Japan.

Julie Hamp, an American, was arrested two weeks ago after authorities allegedly discovered 57 oxycodone pills in a package she shipped to herself. (Photo11: Tsutomu Agechi, AP)

TOKYO — Two weeks after her arrest on suspicion of illegally importing prescription drugs into Japan, Toyota's global communications chief is still in jail — and out of a job.

American Julie Hamp, the highest-ranking female executive at the Japanese automaker, relinquished her role after authorities allegedly discovered oxycodone pills in a package she shipped to herself.

Toyota said in a statement that it "accepted her resignation after considering the concerns and inconvenience that recent events have caused our stakeholders."

The move comes amid speculation that Hamp may face prison time in Japan, where stiff drug laws prohibit foreigners from importing prescription drugs without significant documentation.

Her resignation may have been inevitable, said Robert Dujarric, director of the Institute of Contemporary Asian Studies, at Temple University's Japan Campus.

"In most (Japanese) companies, executives who are arrested will resign, or at least go on leave until the case is resolved," Dujarric said.

Hamp remains in custody in Japan, where prosecutors have a high rate of successful prosecution and can retain suspects for up to 23 days without bail or formal charges. Depending on the charges, Hamp could face up to 10 years in prison.

Toyota had publicly defended Hamp, with President Akio Toyoda holding a televised press conference in June to declare her "a close friend" and an "invaluable" part of the company. He apologized for "the confusion surrounding recent events" but said he believed that she had not knowingly broken Japanese law.

The company acknowledged that it did not do enough to help foreigners integrate into Japan.

"Because the investigation of Ms. Hamp is ongoing, there is little Toyota can say at this time," the company said. "However, we intend to learn from this incident to help ensure a secure working environment for everyone at Toyota around the world as we continue to take the steps necessary to become a truly global company."

Police raided Toyota offices in Japan after they allegedly discovered 57 pills of the powerful painkiller tucked away in a package Hamp sent to herself while moving from the U.S. to Japan.

The incident embroiled Toyota in controversy just months after the 55-year-old Hamp was appointed to the role as the automaker's global communications chief, the first woman to fill that role. Her elevation was viewed as a significant step in Toyota's halting bid to diversify its leadership ranks.

On Thursday, Toyota said it remains committed to that goal. "We remain firmly committed to putting the right people in the right places, regardless of nationality, gender, age and other factors," the company said.

Hamp told police that she had mailed a package containing the painkillers from the U.S. to her hotel in Japan, but had not intended to break Japanese law, according to Japanese media reports. Police said the tablets were not listed on the package's Customs declaration form and were placed in several parcels, including an accessory case and paper bag.

Oxycodone is a widely prescribed painkiller in the United States. But possession is illegal in Japan without a prescription and special permission is required to bring it into the country.

Follow USA TODAY reporter Nathan Bomey on Twitter @NathanBomey.

Bomey reported from McLean, Va.

Copyright 2015 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1LUhxjm