After two months, detectives have few details on who kidnapped Sherri Papini while she was jogging in her quiet town in Northern California.

Part of the reason for this lag is because there have been three high profile cases since November 2 around Redding distracting from the Papini case.

On December 21, the Shasta County Sheriff's office was busy searching for the man who walked into a gas station and set clerk David Wicks on fire. Mr Wicks burned to death and the horrific crime garnered national attention.

Scroll down for video

Police do not have many leads on who kidnapped Sherri Papini (above with her husband and children before her abduction) two months after she was abducted

Sherri Papini (pictured with her husband) told police she was taken while jogging in Yolo county by two Hispanic women

Juan Manuel Venegas was arrested for his murder yesterday.

The department also took on an investigation where Redding police shot and killed a man on November 16.

David Wicks was killed at a gas station where he worked in Burney

They are also chasing down Justin Ryan Mulliken in connection with a January 9 shooting.

However, Sheriff Tom Bosenko told the Record Searchlight that Mrs Papini's case is still a 'top priority.'

He told the paper: 'We are waiting on some of the results on the evidence being processed by the California Department of Justice.'

Mrs Papini and her husband Keith have stayed away from the public eye but were spotted out earlier in January.

Sheriff Bosenko said: 'I can’t speak to more recently, but even initially we had asked Mr Papini to refrain from media interaction and especially after she was found, with some of the information he was releasing.'

Security footage shows the attacker walking into the gas station where he set David Wicks on fire. Juan Manuel Venegas was arrested for the murder yesterday.

On January 10, Mrs Papini was spotted out Severe bruising on her face appeared to have healed but there was no glimpse of her long blonde hair which her husband said had been chopped off by her captors.

Keith Papini kept his gaze to the ground as he followed his wife outside, carrying their young daughter in one arm.

The family moved out of the house in December as police hunted Sherri's captors.

Keith said it had been too difficult for her to remain there after her ordeal.

He was initially cleared as a suspect in her disappearance after passing a polygraph test but police have since refused to rule him out again.

Saturday's outing was the first time Sherri has been seen publicly since she was found bound, beaten and gagged on the side of the road by a passing motorist on November 24.

Sherri Papini was seen for the first time on January 10 leaving her home in Redding, California, since being kidnapped and held hostage for three weeks. The 34-year-old emerged with her husband Keith and their two children

Happier times: Sherri Papini smiles with husband Keith before the November kidnapping

She emerged only to fill up a small red tray with water before returning to the house, The New York Post reported.

Sherri went missing on November 2 when she was abducted during a routine run in the area and held hostage by two armed Hispanic women.

Her husband reported her disappearance when she failed to pick their children up from school. Her cell phone and ear buds were later found on the running track she used.

The 34-year-old vanished on November 2 and was held captive for three weeks before she was found on the side of the road on November 24. Above, she is seen making her way out of the house on Saturday

She was tortured and starved by her captors, whose faces she never saw, before being dumped by the side of the road on Thanksgiving.

The sheriff's office was forced to deny claims they thought her story was a hoax in December after a rogue officer suggested worries it may have been invented.

No definitive motive for the mother's kidnapping has been given or suggested.

While she was still missing, a 'negotiator' working on behalf of a mysterious donor made several offers to those keeping her captive.

At one stage the reward for her return was as much as $100,000 but the ransom was pulled before she was released.

Keith Papini pleaded for privacy after his wife's return and slammed 'disgusting' skeptics who labeled her disappearance a hoax.

He described the black and yellow bruises across her body when she was first brought to hospital and how she had shrunk to 87lbs.

'Her now emaciated body of 87 pounds was covered in multi colored bruises, severe burns, red rashes, and chain markings.

'Her signature long, blonde hair had been chopped off.

'She has been branded and I could feel the rise of her scabs under my fingers. She was thrown from a vehicle with a chain around her waist, attached to her wrists and a bag over her head.