Note I am reviewing the product itself (the price point is up to you, the buyer, to decide if it's worth the cost).



As noted, the Rear Admiral package was an early backer offering that is basically the same as the current Andromeda game package ([...]:



1.) Lifetime Insurance - Never need to pay in-game currency to insure your ship. Current understanding is that insurance is supposed to be easy to earn in-game. Given the portion of the game which deals with this (Persistent Universe) is still in closed Alpha, we can only go by what information we are given. The current offering "only" gives 6-months free insurance. Afterwards, you need to buy it periodically.

2.) Deluxe Silver Collector's Box - You get a physical box for your game, vs the current offering's digital-only access. No one knows what the box looks like at this point so it's a gamble if you'll like it. That said, you can google and find images of what the box "might" look like.

3.) Spaceship-shaped USB Drive - It's a USB drive. 'nuff said. Again, no one knows what it will look like so that's a gamble.

4.) A physical CD of the soundtrack. The current offering gives a digital soundtrack.

5.) A glossy fold-up starmap. If it's anything like elite dangerous, it's likely going to be about 3' x 2' sized. A nice to have if you have the wall space for it but again, since we don't know what it'll look like, it's a gamble.

6.) Hardback "Making of Star Citizen". A "making of" isn't worth much other than to fans, in my opinion. That said, I'm a sucker for hardback books in packages.

7.) 5 spaceship blueprints. - I believe this would be physical blueprints you can display. Which ships, no one knows yet.

8.) 3" plastic spaceship model - Current consensus is it will be a "Constellation".



I believe as a whole, the package does qualify as a nice "Limited Edition" package. You get a lot of swag that is quite nice but already somewhat expensive when compared to other Limited Edition / Collectors Edition packages (Star Wars: The Old Republic and Elite Dangerous come to mind). Still, take everything above with a grain of salt as no one has even seen what the above look like once released. My rating may change as soon as I actually get a hold of the items.