My Alessandra Rich dress, Gianvito Rossi shoes, and veil from New York Vintage. Photo: Jillian Mitchell

Our custom rings by Eric Lundquist were carried in the book I recommended to Brian the weekend we met. Well, a copy of it. Even though we agreed not to do gifts, Brian got me the original he’d had inscribed by Edward P. Jones himself, who put his well wishes for our marriage inside. When we needed a book carved out two days before our wedding, we knew to call our friend Jess Mezei, who practiced on books from the dollar shelf at the Strand. Photo: Jillian Mitchell

We used skeleton keys on our stationery and escort cards, inspired by the key that unlocked my engagement ring. Photo: Jillian Mitchell

Singer Minnie Riperton is a longtime style hero of mine. I always knew I'd wear baby's breath in my hair like her, but the bouquet was a morning-of swap. My skeleton key was tied to the bouquet with a beautiful velvet ribbon. Photo: Jillian Mitchell

I loved Brian’s dahlia. Later he also had a key pinned to his boutonniere. Photo: Jillian Mitchell

My friend manicurist Cassie Lamar does the perfect square nail and has amazing comedic timing. I had such a cocoon of warmth around me as I got ready with my trusted friends. I’ve known them for years from photo shoots so it was natural to be made up by all of them. Poor Grace is trying to get me to sit still. I’m so grateful everyone flew in from Paris Fashion Week, just in time for the day. Photo: Jillian Mitchell

Jawara bestowing his gifts on me. He has such a regal and calming presence. Photo: Jillian Mitchell

I had butterflies but simultaneously felt serenely content. Photo: Jillian Mitchell

Clasping my mom’s vintage bracelet on right before heading downstairs. Photo: Jillian Mitchell

Doing a final read through of my vows, which I’d just scribbled on right before going downstairs. Photo: Jillian Mitchell

My sister, Samira, taking one last look in her Jonathan Simkhai dress. I love the winterberries Jawara put in her hair. Photo: Jillian Mitchell

Here’s our Scottish friend Adam Mitchinson trailed by my brother Cass. Even though Brian didn’t have groomsmen, he invited his closest friends over to our house before the wedding to get ready, and then they all walked together the 15 minutes or so to Akwaaba. They elicited a lot of whoops and compliments in their tuxes and suits and bow ties and top hats and canes and kilts. Here’s our Scottish friend Adam Mitchinson trailed by my brother, Cass. Photo: Jillian Mitchell

We just asked that our guests look sharp and they clearly did not disappoint. Here are my dear friends Jessica Zamora-Turner and Lacey Lennon, who also collaborated to make our invitations. Photo: Jillian Mitchell

My younger nephew, Leo Perrius, was a mischievously sweet ring bearer. Photo: Jillian Mitchell

We rounded the corner to where I could finally see Brian and the chuppah. My mom didn’t lose her cool, but my dad and I let the tears flow. It was very important for me to walk down the aisle with both of my parents. Photo: Jillian Mitchell

We both wrote our vows the morning of our wedding. One of the few old-school wedding traditions we were set on was saying goodnight to each other the night before and not seeing each other again until I walked down the aisle to Nina Simone’s “Seems I’m Never Tired Lovin’ You.” So the morning of, I was at Akwaaba and Brian was in our bedroom at home, and we both got up early and were texting each other notes of encouragement and love as we independently wrote our vows. I was so happy to see him! We’re with Aunt Leslie, our officiant, and my sister and her two sons, Eli and Leo. Photo: Jillian Mitchell

Brian wore a made-to-measure Billy Reid tuxedo. Working with their team was our favorite part of the planning. Christopher Alesevich, the best man, and my brother, Cass, also wore Billy Reid. Photo: Jillian Mitchell

I think this is when my mom was speaking and said she was so thrilled to see “Solange and Cass marry today.” Cass is my brother! She deftly had us cracking up as she quickly caught the gaffe. Photo: Jillian Mitchell

Broom was jumped; glass was broken. Brian was trying to dip me for a dramatic kiss, but I tackled him instead. Photo: Jillian Mitchell