Ads support the website by covering server and domain costs. We're just a group of gamers here, like you, doing what we love to do: playing video games and bringing y'all niche goodness. So, if you like what we do and want to help us out, make an exception by turning off AdBlock for our website. In return, we promise to keep intrusive ads, such as pop-ups, off oprainfall. Thanks, everyone!

By Steve Baltimore / May 27th, 2015

UPDATE: They have now confirmed a North American release for these titles. It appears SAO: Hallow Fragment will be digital only, while SAO: Lost Song will be both digital and retail.



Via Twitter Bandai Namco UK has announced that it would be bringing Sword Art Online: Lost Song to both the PS4 and Vita consoles in Europe this Autumn. The good news didn’t stop there they are also bringing a directors cut of Sword Art Online: Hallow Fragment to the PS4. I have played quite a bit of the Vita version and if they fix up the translation a bit this will be something to behold.

While there is no word yet on a North American release you can bet it is likely coming later today. We will keep you updated as more details become available.

It doesn’t end there! We’re also bringing out Sword Art Online Re: Hollow Fragment to PlayStation 4! pic.twitter.com/4mc121fS60 — Bandai Namco UK (@BandaiNamcoUK) May 27, 2015

Sword Art Online: Lost Song is coming to Europe for PS Vita and PS4 this Autumn! pic.twitter.com/NiWuckJg1Y — Bandai Namco UK (@BandaiNamcoUK) May 27, 2015

About Steve Baltimore Steve started with oprainfall not long after the campaign moved from the IGN forums to Facebook. Ever since, he has been fighting to give all non-mainstream RPGs a fair voice. As the site admin, he will continue to do this and even show there is value in what some would deem "pure ecchi." He loves niche games and anime more than anything... well, except maybe Neptune.

Share this: Facebook

Twitter

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Tumblr

AnimeShinbun

N4G

Reddit



Like this: Like Loading...