Iconic Super-Villains of the DC Universe Take Over Movie Theaters this Summer on August 5, 2016

Burbank, Calif. – June 8, 2016 – This summer, Super-Villains will take over in the highly anticipated big screen action adventure Suicide Squad, marking the theatrical debut of some of the most beloved bad guys in the DC Universe, including Deadshot™, Harley Quinn™, Killer Croc™, Katana™ and Enchantress™, and bringing back to the big screen one of the most dangerous villains of all time, The Joker™. The Super-Villains will unite in an action-packed adventure that will have moviegoers on the edge of their seats, and Warner Bros. Consumer Products (WBCP) has done some teaming up of its own, partnering with its licensees around the world for its global licensing and merchandising program in support of the film. Written and directed by David Ayer and from Warner Bros. Pictures, Suicide Squad hits theaters August 5, 2016.

“Suicide Squad marks the theatrical debut of several of the most recognized, fan-favorite DC Super-Villains, and these iconic characters offer WBCP a unique opportunity to create a robust merchandising program aimed at the adult collector via partnerships with the some of the most renowned licensees in the industry,” said Pam Lifford, President, Warner Bros. Consumer Products.

In support of the electrifying film’s motley crew, Suicide Squad fans can show off in a variety of unique Suicide Squad-inspired apparel and accessories collections by Hot Topic and Bioworld Merchandising; fashion tops and t-shirts from Junk Food Clothing and Trevco; athletic wear by Under Armour; a high-end leather assortment by Matchless London; fan-favorite footwear from Converse; and timepieces from Accutime Watch Corp. Fans can also become their favorite character with role-play outfits and accessories from Rubie’s Costume Co. and Party City.

Collectors can look forward to a number of intricately detailed toys and figures highlighted by a line of Multiverse figures from Mattel; stylized figures from Funko; vehicle replicas from Jada Toys; in addition to “as-seen-on” prop replicas from eFX; and toys and accessories from JLA Direct. Truly devoted fans will be able to show their allegiance to the Squad with electronic accessories and mobile skins from Skinit Acquisition.

HarperCollins Publishers and Titan Publishing will support Suicide Squad with a number of print-published works, and Hallmark, Huckleberry Toys, Trend Setters, Fashion Accessory Bazaar and Underground Toys offer various paper products.

Suicide Squad-inspired décor, accessories and novelty items from top brands including Noble Collection, Franco Manufacturing, Trends International, and more, will round out any fan’s home.

Suicide Squad merchandise tailored to local markets will also be available across Europe, the Middle East and Asia (EMEA), Latin America and Asia-Pacific, with many partners supporting the action film around the world with robust programs including apparel from Mauritius, Primark, and United Labels, accessories, novelty items from Groovy UK, Forbidden Planet, GB Eye and more; as well as Suicide Squad-inspired programs from Movis and Industrias Darks.

Products inspired by Suicide Squad will roll out worldwide in June and are available online at www.ShopDCEntertainment.com/SuicideSquad.

About Suicide Squad

From director David Ayer (Fury, End of Watch) comes Suicide Squad, starring Oscar nominee Will Smith (Ali, The Pursuit of Happyness), Oscar winner Jared Leto (Dallas Buyers Club), Margot Robbie (The Wolf of Wall Street, Focus), Joel Kinnaman (Netflix’s House of Cards) and Oscar nominee Viola Davis (The Help, Doubt).

It feels good to be bad… Assemble a team of the world’s most dangerous, incarcerated Supervillains, provide them with the most powerful arsenal at the government’s disposal, and send them off on a mission to defeat an enigmatic, insuperable entity. U.S. intelligence officer Amanda Waller has determined only a secretly convened group of disparate, despicable individuals with next to nothing to lose will do. However, once they realize they weren’t picked to succeed but chosen for their patent culpability when they inevitably fail, will the Suicide Squad resolve to die trying, or decide it’s every man for himself?

Written and directed by Ayer based on the characters from DC, the film also stars Jai Courtney (Insurgent), Jay Hernandez (Takers), Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje (Thor: The Dark World), Ike Barinholtz (Neighbors), Scott Eastwood (Fury), Cara Delevingne (Paper Towns), Adam Beach (Cowboys & Aliens), and Karen Fukuhara in her feature film debut. It is produced by Charles Roven and Richard Suckle, with Zack Snyder, Deborah Snyder, Colin Wilson and Geoff Johns serving as executive producers.

Warner Bros. Pictures presents, an Atlas Entertainment production, a film by David Ayer, Suicide Squad. The film will be distributed worldwide by Warner Bros. Pictures, a Warner Bros. Entertainment Company. The film opens worldwide in 3D, and in 2D, and in select IMAX 3D theaters beginning August 5, 2016.

Click to enlarge: