(Munroe Falls, Ohio release) – Defending two-time Trans Am Champion Amy Ruman will kick off the season this weekend for Round 1 of the 2017 Trans Am Championship Presented by Pirelli at Sebring International Raceway in Florida. After scoring her third consecutive win at Daytona International Speedway last November, Ruman captured the 2016 Trans Am Championship title for the second year in a row during the Series’ historic 50th Anniversary season.

The short winter break flew by for the “2016 Trans Am Crew of the Year” award winners, as they were busy re-bodying Ruman’s current chassis to the newer C7 Chevrolet Corvette body style. The Series has also made the switch to Pirelli tires for all teams. 2017 is set to be another challenging year, as even more competitors flock to the TA class.

There are 77 competitors entered for the Sebring race at the 3.7-mile road course. The TA class, at 26 entries, will run the multi-class format featuring a joint race with the TA/TA3/TA4 classes for a total of 44 race entries. The TA2 class, powered by AEM, will run a separate race with 33 entries.

“I can’t believe how quickly the season came upon us. I’m so excited to get back in the car and try out the new Pirelli tires and our new C7 Corvette. The crew has worked tirelessly throughout the offseason to get the No. 23 McNichols beast looking great and running fast! We will have a learning curve between the new tires and body style, but should come up to speed fairly quickly,” exclaimed Ruman. “I know there will be both new and familiar faces in the TA class this year, and I am looking forward to some awesome clean, close racing. Let’s just say I’m up for the three-peat challenge!”

Ruman and team are pleased to affirm their continued partnership with McNICHOLS CO., an Industrial and Architectural Hole Product Solutions company, for the 16th consecutive year. “We are delighted to return as Ruman Racing’s primary sponsor for another year of thrilling Trans Am racing. Amy and her outstanding crew have worked hard to be the best and stay on top and have delivered back-to-back championships for us, we are proud to be back on the No. 23,” said Gene McNichols, Chairman and CEO of McNichols Co.

“I am so appreciative to have such an incredible sponsor in McNichols Co. I am honored to be a representative for the Hole Story team and am looking to deliver another Championship for them!” commented Ruman.

The weekend will start off with a Pirelli tire test day on Thursday March 2nd, followed by a promoter test session and official TA practice 1 on Friday. Practice session 2 and qualifying will take place on Saturday March 4th. Sunday will feature two Trans Am races – the TA2 race at 11:05am followed by the TA/3/4 at 3:05pm, both at 100.98-miles 27-laps – all times listed are ET. Visit gotransam.com or svra.com for ticket, full schedule, and all other weekend information.