Wembley will have enhanced security for Saturday's FA Cup final between Arsenal and Chelsea

The Football Association says "enhanced security" will be in place at the FA Cup final in the wake of Monday's Manchester attack.

A terrorist attack at the end of a concert at the Manchester Arena on Monday night left 22 people dead and 59 injured.

And sporting organisations including the FA, the EFL and the International Cricket Council have sought to reassure supporters due to attend upcoming games.

The victims of the attack will be remembered at Saturday's final between Arsenal and Chelsea, and fans have been told to expect extra security checks at Wembley, and similarly at Twickenham where the Exeter Chiefs and Wasps will meet in the Aviva Premiership final.

Extra armed police officers will also be in place at both venues.

"Fan safety is of paramount importance and we have robust security measures in place at Wembley Stadium," an FA statement read.

"In collaboration with the Metropolitan Police and the local authorities there will be an enhanced security operation for all upcoming events.

"All supporters are encouraged to arrive for events at Wembley Stadium as early as possible for security checks and to avoid any delays in entering the stadium."

Wembley also hosts the League Two and Championship play-off finals on Sunday and Monday, and an EFL statement read: "Whilst there have been no specific threats in this country, our Security Advisor will be liaising with Wembley Stadium, the National Counter Terrorism Security Office (NaCTSO) and the Metropolitan Police to ensure the arrangements in place provide a safe and secure environment for all supporters attending this weekend's play-off matches.

"The safety of fans remains our highest priority. The EFL takes security issues extremely seriously and we would urge all supporters planning to be at Wembley Stadium to be vigilant of their surroundings at all times, stay alert and not be alarmed."

Manchester United held a minute's silence for the victims and those injured in the Manchester attacks Manchester United held a minute's silence for the victims and those injured in the Manchester attacks

Manchester United held a minute's silence for the victims as they prepared to fly out for Wednesday's Europa League final in Stockholm, where stringent security measures are in place.

The ICC, meanwhile, says security is the "highest priority" ahead of its Champions Trophy and Women's World Cup tournaments in England.

"We operate on advice from our Tournament Security Directorate - in conjunction with the ECB and relevant authorities - to ensure that we have a robust safety and security plan for both tournaments," a statement read.

"We will continue to work with authorities over the coming hours and days and review our security in line with the threat levels.

"The security situation has been very much front and centre of our preparations and we constantly review our procedures to guarantee they are as effective as possible to keep everyone safe."

Tickets for Netball's final four games at Manchester Arena on June 10 have been temporarily been taken off sale after the attack.

An England Netball statement read: "Following the tragic events at Manchester Arena last night, England Netball has chosen to temporarily suspend ticket sales for the Final Four.

"We will release a further update in due course, for now our thoughts and condolences are with those in Manchester."