Whitey GZ decided to try to rob the victim instead of filming his music video, police said. View Full Caption NYPD and Instagram/benfranklins

THE BRONX — A videographer who has "Achieve the Impossible" and "Dream for Success" tattooed into his arms decided to rob a musician instead of filming him, police said.

The suspect, who also raps under the name Whitey GZ, met the 19-year-old musician on Dyre Avenue in The Bronx and then went to the 22nd floor of 3419 Irwin Ave., near West 234th Street, to film his music video, NYPD officials said.

The suspect has "Dream for Success" and "Achieve the Impossible" tattooed on his arms, police said. (Instagram/@benfranklins)

But rather than stay behind the camera, Whitey tried to swipe the talent's cellphone and backpack, police said.

The victim resisted so Whitey pulled a gun and shot him in the left thigh before running away, police said.

The victim was treated at St. Barnabas Hospital where he's listed in stable condition, police said.

A third man, 36, saw the shooting, according to an NYPD spokesman. It wasn't immediately clear if he was associated with Whitey or the victim.

Whitey had not been arrested as of Thursday afternoon, police said.

Whitey has "Achieve the Impossible" tattooed on his left arm and "Dream for Success" on his right, police said. He was last seen wearing a white T-shirt, black pants and white sneakers, police said.

He maintains several social media profiles on which he publishes his own music.

A video posted by MR From The Land Like TarzanðŸŒ´ (@benfranklins) on Aug 25, 2016 at 6:31pm PDT

His latest post, on Instagram, is a plea for a companion.

I JUST NEED A GIRL ðŸ˜«ðŸ¤’ðŸ‘«ðŸ™„ A photo posted by MR From The Land Like TarzanðŸŒ´ (@benfranklins) on Sep 20, 2016 at 7:59pm PDT

In another Instagram post, he's seen pointing a gun at the camera.

A photo posted by MR From The Land Like TarzanðŸŒ´ (@benfranklins) on Aug 27, 2016 at 11:22pm PDT

Anyone with information should contact Crime Stoppers at (800) 577-TIPS (8477).