

A few years ago at one of our CIO events, one of the speakers was wrapping up a talk about leading big-data projects, which happened to be the subject of our cover story that month. Gesturing toward the scattered piles of CIO magazines, she graciously suggested everyone make sure to read "the excellent story in those pamphlets on your tables." I saw a number of sympathetic grins from CIOs in the audience as I got up to thank her. "Lady, that's no pamphlet," I said lightly. "That's my magazine!"



We've known for a long time that the light in CIO magazine's tunnel wasn't sunshine. Media companies have been aggressively driving the digital train for the past decade, welcoming on board the advertisers that once fueled the robustly profitable business model for print magazines. The good news is that CIO's brand is thriving in all the right markets: IT leadership events, online at our award-winning CIO.com site and in our custom publishing business.



Bringing IT leaders to the forefront of the business landscape has been our core mission since CIO's first issue in September 1987. We've chronicled your career journeys. We've tracked your C-suite successes and failures. We've advocated for your expanding role in shaping business strategy. We are forever grateful that so many of you shared your stories with us over the years. But ultimately, your greatest source of knowledge, strength and wisdom is each other.

So be sure to stay active in your CIO and IT leadership communities. Attend as many CIO events as you can (especially ours, which in my biased view are the best on the market). On CIO.com, follow Senior Writer Clint Boulton's stories. And sign up for our Insider program (www.cio.com/insider), where our talented Executive Editor Mitch Betts will keep you supplied with the kind of in-depth articles, expert advice and research insights you've come to expect from us.

Take care and stay in touch. I hope we'll see you at our next CIO Perspectives event (Nov. 12th in Houston, Texas)...