As of Wednesday afternoon, no fewer than 29 NFL players had been suspended from starting the 2014 season, a league spokesperson told Mashable.

Some will miss just that first game; others are banned for four games. A few have been restricted indefinitely. Collectively, they represent 20 of the NFL's 32 teams and could make up more than half of a squad's 53-man roster.

Some of the suspensions may strike you as overly harsh. Some may strike you as not strong enough. But either way, NFL suspensions are a hotter topic than ever before heading into the 2014 season. So, in true hashtag-2014 form, here's a definitive listicle of all 29 NFL players missing their respective teams' season openers and why.

1. Frank Alexander, Carolina

The defensive end is suspended four games for violating the league's substance-abuse policy.

2. Stedman Bailey, St. Louis

The wide receiver is serving a four-game ban after testing positive for performance-enhancing drugs.

3. Justin Blackmon, Jacksonville

The hyper-talented wide receiver was suspended indefinitely from the league last November for multiple violations of its substance-abuse policy. In July, he was arrested again.

4. Dwayne Bowe, Kansas City



The receiver is suspended one game for an arrest for marijuana possession that was somehow later "bargained down to lesser charges of defective equipment and littering," according to NFL.com.

5. Nigel Bradham, Buffalo

The linebacker is serving a one-game suspension for violating the league's substance-abuse policy, reportedly because of marijuana.

6. Brandon Browner, New England

The cornerback is serving a four-game suspension for unspecified substance-abuse infractions.

7. Josh Gordon, Cleveland

The star receiver is serving a season-long suspension for repeatedly violating the league's substance-abuse policy, most recently by testing positive for marijuana.

8. Jakar Hamilton, Dallas

The defensive back is out four games for violating the league's substance-abuse policy.

9. Eric Herman, New York Giants

The offensive lineman is serving a four-game suspension after testing positive for performance-enhancing drugs — he says because of a prescription mix-up.

10. Will Hill, Baltimore

The safety is serving a six-game ban after violating the league's substance-abuse policy multiple times.

11. Jayron Hosley, New York Giants

The cornerback is suspended four games for an unspecified violation of the league's substance-abuse policy.

12. Tanard Jackson, Washington

The safety is serving an indefinite suspension for multiple violations of the league's substance-abuse policy.

13. Lane Johnson, Philadelphia

The offensive lineman is out four games after testing positive for performance-enhancing drugs. He, too, blames a prescription mix-up.

14. Reshad Jones, Miami

The safety is out four games after testing positive for performance-enhancing drugs.

15. Dion Jordan, Miami

The defensive end is serving a four-game ban for testing positive for performance-enhancing drugs.

16. Chris Lewis-Harris, Cincinnati

The cornerback is out two games after violating the league's substance-abuse policy.

17. Robert Mathis, Indianapolis

The linebacker is serving a four-game ban after testing positive for performance-enhancing drugs. He blames a fertility medication.

18. Marlon Moore, Cleveland

The receiver is serving a one-game suspension for a substance-abuse violation.

19. Brandon Meriweather, Washington

The safety is banned two games for an illegal hit on an opposing receiver.

20. Matt Prater, Denver

The top-notch kicker is out four games of the season after violating the league's substance-abuse policy.

21. Ray Rice, Baltimore

The star running back is serving a two-game suspension for allegedly knocking out his then-fiancee in a casino elevator. The couple is now married.

22. Ace Sanders, Jacksonville

The receiver is out four games after violating the league's substance-abuse policy.

23. Orlando Scandrick, Dallas

The cornerback is suspended four games after testing positive for performance-enhancing drugs.

24. Jerome Simpson, Minnesota

The receiver is out three games for his second violation of the league's substance-abuse policy. The first time, he was caught mailing two pounds of marijuana to his home in Kentucky. This time it's for a driving-under-the-influence arrest.

25. Aldon Smith, San Francisco

The linebacker is serving a nine-game suspension for multiple violations of the league's personal-conduct and substance-abuse policies. Most notably, he allegedly made a fake bomb threat at Los Angeles International Airport in April.

26. Donald Stephenson, Kansas City

The offensive lineman is out four games after testing positive for performance-enhancing drugs.

27. Brian Tyms, New England

The wide receiver is serving a four-game ban after testing positive for performance-enhancing drugs. He blames Adderall.

28. Daryl Washington, Arizona

The linebacker is serving an indefinite suspension for repeatedly violating the league's substance-abuse policy. He has said his most recent positive test was for marijuana.

29. Wes Welker, Denver

The star receiver is serving a four-game ban after testing positive for performance-enhancing drugs, in this case amphetamines. He denies reports that the positive test is the result of taking molly — cut with amphetamines — at the Kentucky Derby, where he was spotted handing out $100 bills to random fans.

Now this photo of Welker handing out $100 bills at the Derby makes more sense http://t.co/Iy6XfAoeun pic.twitter.com/r4VNC5wGer — TDdaily (@TDdaily) September 3, 2014

BONUS: 1 NFL Owner Suspended to Start the 2014 Season

No NFL Twitter for Jim Irsay for a while. Image: Carolyn Kaster/Associated Press

Indianapolis Colts owner is serving a six-game ban after pleading guilty to driving while under the influence of oxycodone and hydrocodone. He was also fined $500,000 and can't talk about the NFL on Twitter during his suspension.