NATIONAL CITY, Calif. — Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders hosted a rally in National City Saturday evening and was introduced by comedian George Lopez.

“Nothing is over yet and this movement is still going on,” Lopez said during his introduction. “I want you to have money. I want you to have an education. I want the police to leave us alone.”

Sanders, who spoke to nearly 7,500 supporters at Kimball Park, stuck to familiar themes in his speech.

“Together we are going to create an economy that works for all of us, not just wealthy contributors,” he told the cheering crowd. “(America needs) a democracy that does not mean a campaign finance system in which billionaires buy elections.”

“We need a massive federal jobs program to put our people back to work,” Sanders said, advocating that the federal government could create such jobs by rebuilding America’s infrastructure, including water treatment facilities and roads.

Sanders said he supports the right of states to legalize marijuana and said he would vote for the California ballot initiative to do so if he lived here.

He also called on America to “invest in young people in jobs and an education, not in incarceration” and to “make public colleges and universities tuition-free.”

The National City Police Department said A and D avenues and East 12th and East 15th streets, would be closed around the park about two hours before the event.

Sanders also was scheduled to speak in Vista Sunday afternoon at Rancho Buena Vista High School.

Former President Bill Clinton Saturday urged San Diego County voters to support his wife, Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton, in the California primary next month.

The nation’s 42nd president spoke to a crowd of hundreds of supporters packed into the gymnasium at Bonita Vista High School. Their enthusiasm did not seem to wane despite his being about an hour late to the event. An overflow crowd was led to an area outside the gym.

Presumptive Republican nominee Donald Trump is scheduled to hold a rally at the San Diego Convention Center on May 27.