Jun 26, 2014; Brooklyn, NY, USA; NBA commissioner Adam Silver addresses the crowd before the start of the 2014 NBA Draft at the Barclays Center. Mandatory Credit: Brad Penner-USA TODAY Sports

The Utah Jazz worked out their first group of incoming NBA prospects on Wednesday, trying to find that next diamond in the rough. According to Jazz VP of Player Personnel Walt Perrin, it’s a search that might pervade the entirety of the 2015 NBA Draft.

Jody Genessy of the Deseret News was on hand to witness the proceedings and spoke with Perrin, who told the Jazz beat writer that this summer’s pool of potential draftees may be lacking in marquee-level talent:

“I don’t see a lot of so-called NBA superstars, if any.”

The Jazz currently sit in the 12th position of the first round, pending the results of the NBA Draft Lottery on Wednesday, May 20th. If you’re the masochistic type, head on over to the RealGM Draft Lottery Simulator and see how long it takes you to win a top three pick for the Jazz.

The team will also owns the No. 42 pick of the second round.

Given the cadre of young and developing talent already on the roster, the likelihood that Utah’s pick will fall in the middle of the first round and the opinion of Perrin and others that the draft may be lacking in star potential, it might behoove the Jazz to move their pick.

On the other hand, you never know when a player might exceed his perceived value and bring their game to a higher level. Our own Rudy Gobert was drafted 27th overall in a weak draft class and has evolved into a franchise-changer.

The franchise has also done well to round out its roster with D-League call-ups and undrafted free agents. Jazz point guard Bryce Cotton was discovered during an early workout last summer and eventually signed a multi-year deal with the team.

Perrin on potential sleepers in this year’s draft class:

Perrin continued: "But that's not to say somebody may not jump forward and become the next Stephen Curry or somebody like that." — Jody Genessy (@DJJazzyJody) May 6, 2015

What does this mean for the Jazz and what should they do on draft day? Comment below or hit us up on Twitter with your thoughts!