There were no new developments on Monday in regards to Alex McKinnon’s condition.

The Club has continued to provide factual updates in consultation with Alex’s family at this delicate time.

Alex was brought out of an induced coma following his initial surgery last Tuesday and has been conscious since. Doctors confirmed Alex had suffered a devastating spinal injury on Wednesday. On Sunday he was able to communicate with his family after his assisted ventilation was removed.

While Alex’s condition continues to improve, his body is in the first phase of recovery. As previously shared, he has movement in his right arm and the uncertainty remains in the extent of further recovery. The doctors explained any regeneration and recovery could be up to two years.

As Alex remains in hospital in a serious but stable condition, visitation is restricted. Therefore coach Wayne Bennett visited on Monday without Alex’s teammates as initially planned.

The Club is extremely disappointed in the sensationalised television news story on Monday night about this tragic situation.

One of the most important factors for Alex at this time is hope, which was jeopardised by this report.

The Club and the McKinnons appreciate the respectful way other media have handled and reported on Alex’s condition.

Club staff will continue to stay with Alex and his family in Melbourne and continue to provide any appropriate update in consultation with his family. We again request Alex and his family's privacy is respected at this time.

To Members, fans and all who are sending their best wishes, thank you.

All offers of financial and in-kind support are appreciated however our focus remains on Alex. When the time is appropriate, the Club will notify how your contribution can be accepted.

From Alex’s family; Kate and Scott McKinnon (Alex’s parents) and Teigan Power (Alex’s partner):

“We would once again like to thank the public and media for the ongoing show of concern and support for our son and partner, Alex.

“While there is a lot of detail being reported about Alex’s condition, it is important to remember that it is still early days for him post-injury.

“Those close to Alex know he is strong, and that he is a fighter and, that alone, is reason to remain hopeful.”

Messages of support for Alex and his family can be emailed to knights@newcastleknights.com.au. All messages we receive will be given to Alex and his family at the appropriate time.

#RiseForAlex