Analyzing the players who made the Miami Dolphins' 53-man roster:

Quarterback (2): Ryan Tannehill and Matt Moore

Ryan Tannehill: He's made tremendous strides in this new spread offense (86.5 passer rating, 68.3 percent of passes completed), which will utilize his athleticism more and requires accuracy. But is Tannehill a top 15 NFL quarterback yet?

Matt Moore: He's one of the top five backup quarterbacks in the NFL, which should justify his $4M salary for this season. But the Dolphins have discussed trades involving him, and other quarterbacks.

Cut: Seth Lobato

Tailbacks (4): Lamar Miller, Knowshon Moreno, Damien Williams, Orleans Darkwa

Lamar Miller: Miller's speed will allow him to deliver stretch plays, but he needs to become a better inside runner to hold off Knowshon Moreno.

Knowshon Moreno: Moreno's ability to set up blocks should boost the Dolphins' running game, but only if he's healthy. He’s not there yet.

Damien Williams: This undrafted rookie from Oklahoma has been one of camp's more pleasant surprises, but he’s still an unfinished product.

Orleans Darkwa: Darkwa, who produced a team-leading 194 all-purpose yards in the exhibitions season, came on strong late. But his spot isn’t safe.

Cut: Daniel Thomas, Marcus Thigpen

Receiver (5): Mike Wallace, Brian Hartline, Brandon Gibson, Jarvis Landry, Rishard Matthews.

Mike Wallace: Wallace's ability to get open deep makes him one of the NFL's top big play receivers, but he needs chemistry with Tannehill.

Brian Hartline: Hartline's savvy route running and reliable hands will likely help him remain the team's leading receiver.

Brandon Gibson: He's a smart, tough route runner who continues to develop as a dangerous slot receiver. But he’s got competition now.

Jarvis Landry: This former LSU standout, whom the Dolphins selected in the second-round, is the second coming of O.J. McDuffie.

Rishard Matthews: He emerged as a reliable slot receiver last season, and his toughness could help him excel as this unit's top reserve.

Cut: Kevin Cone, Matt Hazel, Damian Williams (Aug. 31)

Tight ends (3): Charles Clay, Dion Sims, Gator Hoskins

Charles Clay: Clay is nursing a sore right knee, but when he gets healthy he should threaten the seam for this offense.

Dion Sims: He was adequate as a rookie last season, but this camp he's made significant improvements as an in-line blocker.

Gator Hoskins: This rookie from Marshall, who led the nation in touchdowns for two college seasons, has a knack for finding the end zone.

Cut: Kyle Miller, Evan Wilson

Branden Albert: He's a forceful pass block, which should be expected since he's a Pro Bowler. But his run blocking needs work.

Daryn Colledge: His experience level and durability helped him lock down the starting left guard spot, but can he stay healthy for his ninth NFL season?

Mike Pouncey: Pushing his rehab of a surgically repaired hip helped him avoid beginning the season on the PUP. He’ll begin practicing this week.

Shelley Smith: He's small compared to the rest of Miami's offensive linemen, but his athleticism should help him with run blocking.

Ja'Wuan Jame: James is a polished pass rusher, who has proven he can be durable. However, this tackles run blocking needs work.

Samson Satele: Satele has started 98 games in his seven NFL seasons, and will hold the center spot down until Pouncey's healthy enough to play.

Billy Turner: The 2014 third-round pick is a violent run blocker when healthy, but he needs to get technically sound, and get past his turf toe injury.

Nate Garner: Garner's versatility had helped him start 19 games in his six seasons with the Dolphins. He plays all five O-line spots.