A JUDGE has blasted a mum-of-twelve for having so many children after she was convicted of benefit fraud.

Melanie Edwards, 40, fraudulently claimed more than £150,000 in benefits between 2009 and 2014 by claiming to be a single parent.

SWNS - Bristol 5 Melanie Edwards claimed to be a single parent while claiming a six-figure sum over five years

But Edwards, of Lamerton near Tavistock, Devon, was in fact living with her husband Brian – while both worked in a factory.

The fraudster claimed in court that she pocketed the six-figure sum in order to support her kids.

But during the five-year period when the fraud took place, the couple continued to have children – adding another four to their growing brood.

Judge Paul Darlow asked the defendant: “Why just not have fewer children?”

Edwards replied: “That would be an option.”

The judge said the impact on the fraudster’s kids – the youngest of which is just 22 months old – was a major consideration when deciding her sentence.

SWNS - Bristol 5 The defence lawyer said Edwards didn't live a luxurious lifestyle, with the family of 14 sharing a three-bed house

SWNS - Bristol 5 Edwards replied that having fewer children 'would be an option'

She was sentenced to 16 months in prison, suspended for two years.

Judge Darlow told Edwards: “It is only your children who have kept this sentence from being immediate.

“One has to wonder why you have so many children when you cannot support them without the state.”

The mum-of-twelve admitted three counts of benefit fraud at Plymouth Crown Court.

Related stories Kn*b SEEKERS ALLOWANCE 'Violent ex used disability benefits to pay for £5k PENIS enlargement', claims mum Dole Dreams 'It's like having a dog: Teenager who claims £460 in benefits reveals plans for a baby instead of a job Exclusive Jobsneaker's allowance Chunnel migrant spotted claiming benefits before heading home to cosy semi-detached Move over, Boris! Teen scrounger who made his girlfriend homeless wants to be next PM (and he wants to increase benefits… DANGEROUS EUROPEAN FUGITIVE Albanian murderer who posed as a Kosovan asylum seeker to gain UK citizenship could be deported PLUCKY ESCAPE Scrounger in £140,000 benfits con dodges jail - after getting a job as a beautician to try to pay money back

She claimed £144,113 in tax credits, £9,606 in housing benefits and £988.47 council tax relief.

In addition to the suspended jail term, Edwards has also been ordered to pay back the colossal sum through reductions to her legitimate benefits.

It is not known how long it might take to get close to repaying the money.

According to the Plymouth Herald, Edwards refused to answer questions from reporters as she left the court building after sentencing.

UPPA/Photoshot 5 Judge Paul Darlow asked the mum-of-twelve why she continued having kids if she couldn't afford to support them

Alamy 5 Edwards was sentenced to 16 months in prison, suspended for two years, at Plymouth Crown Court

But Francesca Whebell, prosecuting, revealed the benefits claims were genuine when the mum began to claim them.

Edwards and her husband were both working alternate shifts at Kensey Foods at Launceston, but she is since thought to have given up working.

William Parkhill, defending, said the amount she claimed was “almost breathtaking”.

But he said she would have been entitled to claim large sums legitimately anyway.

He also added that the family did not have a luxurious lifestyle, with 14 of them sharing a three-bedroom house.

Mr Parkhill said: “She now faces an awkward conversation with her 12 children to explain what she has done.”

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4512.