TORONTO, CANADA - JANUARY 7: Daniel Cleary #11 of the Detroit Red Wings shoots during warmup before NHL action against the Toronto Maple Leafs at The Air Canada Centre January 7, 2012 in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (Photo by Abelimages/Getty Images) (Photo by Abelimages/Getty Images)





Detroit Red Wings forward Daniel Cleary is looking to make a comeback.

Last season was a rough one for Cleary. The 36-year-old had just one goal and one assist in the mere 17 games he took the ice — thanks to an injury. He didn’t even see the postseason (not that it lasted very long for the Wings, anyway).

Next month, Cleary becomes an unrestricted free agent when his 1-year contract with the Wings expires. But if he has his way — Cleary won’t be going anywhere. He told the St. John’s Telegram that he soon plans to speak with General Manager Ken Holland about his future with the team.

“Are you kidding me?” he asked rhetorically. “I live for it. You don’t play this long without loving the game. I love to practice, I love to skate, I love working out. I love everything there is about hockey.”

Sources within the Red Wings’ organization suggest Holland and Detroit management are big on living up to their word, and there was some kind of agreement a couple of years ago between Cleary and the team that the Wings would take care of him after turning down a couple of big offers to remain in Detroit.

In the summer of 2013, the Philadelphia Flyers offered the Red Wings veteran a three-year contract worth $8.25 million. The Florida Panthers also came in with a hefty offer.

The report goes on to say that just before signing a 3-year deal with the Flyers, Cleary drove himself to Traverse City to meet face to face with Holland and then-coach Mike Babcock — where a gentleman’s agreement of sorts took place.

Holland and Babcock were big fans of Cleary’s. They like his character — good dressing room guy, as they call it in hockey. They wanted him in Detroit, and Cleary wanted to remain in Motown. All they had to do was make it happen.

And they did, to the tune of $1.75 million for one year and a no-trade clause.

As part of the deal, apparently, there was a handshake agreement on another contract for 2014-15, which they agreed on last July. And yet another for 2015-16. Supposedly. Maybe for a Detroit discount of $750,000 or so.

We haven’t yet heard anything from the Wings organization whether or not they would be interested in keeping Cleary on board. Some sources think he could stay with a position in the front office if he isn’t resigned to the team.

Stay tuned.