James Clapper: Our Institutions ‘Are Under Assault’ Both Externally and Internally

Former Director of National Intelligence James Clapper says the United States’ political institutions are currently “under assault” both externally and internally, in the wake of President Donald Trump’s firing of ex-FBI Director James Comey.

“The developments of the past week are very bothersome, very disturbing to me,” Clapper said on CNN’s “State of the Union” on Sunday.

“I think in many ways our institutions are under assault, both externally — and that’s the big news here, the Russian interference in our election system — and I think as well, our institutions are under assault internally,”

When asked if he meant if those institutions were “under assault” internally by the president himself, Clapper said “exactly” and added that he believed Trump was undermining the checks and balances inherent to the U.S. political system.

ROBERT STEELE: There was a time, in the 1990’s, when I admired James Clapper. He was (no longer) easily one of the most intellectual flag officers I have ever known, in the top five out of roughly 70. Then he lost his integrity. The crap he is spouting today confirms his dishonesty — on the one hand, he is absolutely right, our Deep State institutions are under attack (and I am leading that charge with help from Cynthia McKinney and others soon to be identified) and on the other hand, he is so full of shit as to make me wonder if he could not receive a mental health examination. The Russians did not hack the US election — Hillary Clinton tried and failed to hack the election, and James Clapper committed treason on multiple occasions by allowing his notional subordinate Saudi Arabian whore and traitor John Brennan, to engage in all manner of domestic subversion.

James Clapper is a traitor with no moral compass. If I were advising our legitimate president, which I am not, I would suggest that James Clapper should be stripped of his clearances and denied access to all forms of classified information. This will make him unemployable — any company employing him without clearances should be denied eligibility for government contracts. His current “non-profit” employer should of course be denied any additional grants from the government.

This is the man who spent over a decade leading $70-100 billion a year in waste that was never able to satisfy more than 4% “at best” of what a major commander needs in the way of decision-support (and nothing for everyone else, least of all the troops on the front line).

This is a man who oversaw mass surveillance by NSA, spying on and blackmail of our politicians by NSA and CIA, drone assassination and torture & rendition by CIA, mind-control operations at a scale that will one day rival the Nuremberg trials, and more.

Good-bye, James Clapper.

See Especially:

#UNRIG – the End of the Deep State

See Also:

Deep State @ Phi Beta Iota

Robert Steele with Sarah Westall on Trump, Comey, the Integrity Revolution

Robert Steele: The Soft Coup Collapses – Blackmail Revealed – What Next? CIA was bluffing, produced no evidence – Russians did not “hack” the election. Is this the beginning of the end of the Deep State in the USA? Can Trump clean house & wage peace?

Robert Steele: UNHINGED: drone assassination – American suicide

Robert Steele: UNHINGED — Two Books on Terror Reviewed (Rebuttal, a Book of Lies & Broken!, Truth as Fiction)