As a podcast on iTunes, listenable/downloadable onscreen at Taki’s Magazine, or as a transcript here.

Microaggression of the Week was fallout from the October 16th airing of the late-night TV show Jimmy Kimmel Live!

One recurring feature on the show is a “Kids’ Table,” which spoofs the solemn round-table discussions on weighty topics that you get on Sunday morning TV. Instead of credentialed bigfoot commentators, Kimmel has four second or third graders round the table with him.

One of the kids, a little chap six years old, when asked what he’d do about the fact of America owing China over a trillion dollars, suggested going over there and killing all the Chinese.

Naturally that had race grievance lobbyists shrieking and swooning from coast to coast. I observed:

In San Francisco this Monday, the race creeps held a protest march. The marchers carried pictures showing funnyman Jimmy Kimmel’s face with a Hitler mustache drawn above his lip and a swastika by his side. Hard to beat that for creativity and originality, eh? As I have had occasion to remark before: If there is a prize awarded in Hell for killing Chinese people, the easy winner in the 20th-century division—and in fact, I am pretty sure, the all-time winner—would be Mao Tse-tung. Why not put his face on Jimmy Kimmel, you nitwits? Oh, but then you wouldn’t be getting your checks from the Chinese Consulate, would you? Right.

I wouldn’t be surprised to hear that the offending child has been turned over to the authorities in Peking (oh all right: Pei-p’ing) for Thought Correction. He would not be first six-year-old boy to be made a political prisoner by the ChiComs.

The full Radio Derb playbill:

Prisoner of New York (that’s me this week).

Momma's got a brand new bag (from Barneys, Madison Avenue).

Teaching While White (and similar offenses).

Wheels coming off Obamacare (making the case for term limits).

Arming the enemy—dispatches from the War About Nothing.

White man speak with politically incorrect tongue (causing heap plenty offense).

Craving Clintonian honesty (another show where kids comment on the news).

Open borders defeated in New York! (by the doughty Ron Unz).

Niger, the African tiger. (A sad story, of which there will be many more.)

In memoriam Warren Gamaliel Harding (the Great).

It’s all there at Taki’s Magazine.

Just one erratum: In regard to the Intelligence Squared open-borders debate, I said:

Ron has just launched a new website, title The Unz Review: An Alternative Media Selection, subtitle "A Collection of Interesting, Important, and Controversial Perspectives Largely Excluded from the American Mainstream Media." I urge you to check it out at www.unz.com.

In fact Ron hasn’t quite finished setting up the website, but he tells us it’ll only be a few days. Keep checking: I’ve seen a pre-version and it’s worth waiting for.