Lovedrop Profile Joined April 2010 2579 Posts Last Edited: 2012-04-04 16:25:35 #1



The Battle.net World Championship, which will take place later this year, will be the culmination of more than 30 eSports events run by Blizzard and tournament organizers. These events are collectively known as the StarCraft II World Championship Series.



The goal of the StarCraft II World Championship Series is to identify a true global champion, as players enter and qualify through open tournaments starting at the national level. The National Championships are designed to allow local heroes to rise to the top and be recognized in their country. The top finishers at each National Championship will earn spots at their continental Finals events, which will be an all-out brawl between neighboring countries to decide who will represent their continent at the Battle.net World Championship.







Do you think you have what it takes to compete at the Battle.net World Championship?



Read more



+ Show Spoiler [FAQ] +

How do I qualify?



You must climb the ranks of the StarCraft II World Championship Series. The entry level will be made up of National Qualifiers and will give players a chance to earn a spot at their respective National Championship. Once you’ve made it through to your National Championship, you must then fight through your compatriots for an invitation to your Continental Championship. At your continent’s Finals, you’ll be up against other National Champions all vying to earn the right to represent their country and continent at the Battle.net World Championship.



What are National Qualifiers?



National Qualifiers are events, both live and online, that have been awarded slots that feed into a National Championship. Winners of National Qualifiers will receive an invitation, including travel expenses, to attend their National Championship. Some events will have Nationals slots added to their prize pool; others will be complete standalone events. More information about where to sign up for your country’s National Qualifiers will be made available soon!



Will the format of every National Championship and Continental Championship be the same?



Yes! The rules of play for each National Championship and Continental Championship will be identical. Each tournament will be a best-of-3 double-elimination format.



How do you define nationality?



For the 2012 StarCraft II World Championship Series, nationality is defined by your country of citizenship. Should you have multiple countries of citizenship you must choose one for the tournament year, and you will have to qualify through that country’s path in order to climb through the ranks.



My country is not listed here; will I be able to participate in the StarCraft II World Championship Series?



We plan to accommodate as many countries as possible. More information about participating countries not listed here will be posted at a later date.



What is the total prize pool of the StarCraft II World Championship Series?



More information about prize pools for the StarCraft II World Championship Series will be announced soon.



When are these events happening?



More information for National Qualifiers -- including details about your country’s National Qualifiers and the various organizations involved at the National Qualifier level -- as well as details on National Championships and Continental Championships, will be announced soon. Be sure to check back at StarCraft2.com for further updates.

The Battle.net World Championship, which will take place later this year, will be the culmination of more than 30 eSports events run by Blizzard and tournament organizers. These events are collectively known as the StarCraft II World Championship Series.The goal of the StarCraft II World Championship Series is to identify a true global champion, as players enter and qualify through open tournaments starting at the national level. The National Championships are designed to allow local heroes to rise to the top and be recognized in their country. The top finishers at each National Championship will earn spots at their continental Finals events, which will be an all-out brawl between neighboring countries to decide who will represent their continent at the Battle.net World Championship.Do you think you have what it takes to compete at the Battle.net World Championship?Read more here Writer undefeated thunderdome champion 。ﾟ+.(o´･ω･｀o)+.ﾟ｡ｲｨ!! :+:+: @lubdrop