Sundays are typically reserved for finishing up that homework assignment you forgot about until the last minute or football and day drinking to forget about the anxiety of the upcoming week. Thanks to Grandma’s House brewery, the latter of that can be achieved, either curled up on the couch or at one of the old dining room tables with a craft beer and crossstitch hoop in hand.

Grandma’s House hosts a weekly Foul-Mouthed Cross-Stitch gathering, where people of all ages and genders can enjoy one of their craft brews and cross-stitch playful designs. Among the works of art were

pieces that said “Nope” and “Nasty Woman,” along with other deisgns with varying levels of profanity. Recently, activities typically thought of as elderly activities, like cross-stitching and bingo, have been adopted by younger generations. The profanity is an odd matchup with the ages old craft, but the juxtaposition has become popular in the last few years. Ashley Nelson, a regular at the event, stitched away at a piece that will say “Eat S**t and Die.”

“We’re not our grandmothers obviously, and I don’t know, I’ve got a bad mouth,” she said.

The cozy environment provides a relaxing getaway for stressed out college students, or members of older generations who wish to reconnect with their hobby. The bar feels like your grandmother’s house, decorated with antique toys and a bar top made from an old quilt. The tap handles have knitted sleeves,

like the itchy sweaters your grandmother makes for holidays.

“I wanted it to be a relaxed, homey, comfortable vibe,” said Matthew Fuerst, owner of Grandma’s.

Patrons can order one of the many local craft beers and stitch away, without feeling self-conscious

about their crafting skills.

“It’s a chill atmosphere,” Nelson said. “It’s just kind of a place to do what you do, hang out with friends and catch up.”

Grandma’s House has been open for two and a half years, and hosting the cross-stitch events since the beginning of football season.

“Football on Sundays has never been particularly good for breweries in general, and it certainly wasn’t for us,” Fuerst said. “I spent a year promoting it as a place to watch football and it didn’t work. I decided to scrap that entirely and to give this a shot and it took off beyond what I could have expected.”

Sundays are typically slow days for breweries and bars, however, only a few empty seats remained once the event got into full swing.

Many women can feel intimidated at bars and breweries, as craft beer drinking has been considered a maledominated activity. Despite that, Grandma’s has grown to be a favorite of the local brewdrinking

ladies.

“Our vibe is more friendly to female craft beer drinkers. We have significantly more female followers than men followers, which is pretty abnormal in the beer industry,” Fuerst said.

The brewery is also welcoming to those who don’t drink, said Shy Yant, who’s been attending the weekly gatherings for three months.

“I don’t drink, and I don’t feel like I need to to fit in at all. The staff here are really friendly and

everybody is just nice. It’s just calm here.”

Foul-Mouthed Cross-Stitch Sundays are held from 12 to 3 p.m. at Grandma’s House brewery, located at 1710 South Broadway in Denver. Admission and supplies are free.