Report removed from HuffPo over the Weekend; Clinton Foundation "Racketeering."

Update, 6/9/2016: President Obama today whole heartedly endorsed Hillary Clinton for President. This seems to create a conflict of interest for the Dept. of Justice, which has announced publicly that they are investigating her for violations of several statutes. It seems to require the appointment of an independent counsel prosecutor under statutes enacted in response to Nixon's transgressions. Stay tuned.

Last Saturday, a journalist employed by liberal Huffington Post reported that the Federal Bureau of Investigations (FBI) will recommend that the Department of Justice file a Federal criminal complaint, indicting U.S. Democrat presidential candidate Hillary Rodham Clinton.

Frank Hugenard is a political scientist, public speaker and freelance contributor to the Huffington Post. He had his story removed by HuffPo editors and his account disabled without explanation. His article bore the title: ""Hillary Clinton to be Indicted On Federal Racketeering Charges" It quickly went viral before being removed.

FBI Director James Comey will present a recommendation to Loretta Lynch, Attorney General and head of the U.S. Department of Justice, that includes a compelling argument that the Clinton Foundation is an ongoing criminal enterprise engaged in money laundering and soliciting bribes in exchange for political, policy and legislative favors to individuals, corporations and even governments both foreign and domestic.

Huguenard, a Bernie Sanders supporter, says that he has sources within the FBI. They say the Bureau will recommend that the DOJ file Racketeering charges against Mrs. Clinton.

The Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO) is a United States Federal Law passed in 1970 that was designed to provide a tool for law enforcement agencies to fight organized crime. RICO allows prosecution and punishment for alleged racketeering activity that has been executed as part of an ongoing criminal enterprise.

Attorneys regard the RICO statute as unduly broad, and in the past it has been used to indict even legitimate businessmen for legitimate activities.

Hillary Clinton admits using her own server to send classified e-mails, which was against State Department policy at the time.

Activity considered to be racketeering may include bribery, counterfeiting, money laundering, embezzlement, illegal gambling, kidnapping, murder, drug trafficking, slavery, and a host of other nefarious business practices.

Huffington Post Politics senior editor Sam Stein claims to have no idea why the post was removed, and refused to give further comment when contacted by Breitbart News. Stein opined, "Sorry. I don't know. I'd direct your question to a blog editor."

A controversy arose in March 2015, when it was revealed by the State Department's inspector general that Clinton had exclusively used personal email accounts on a non-government, privately maintained server-in lieu of email accounts maintained on federal government servers-when conducting official business during her tenure as Secretary of State. Some experts, officials, members of Congress, and political opponents, contended that her use of private messaging system software and a private server violated State Department protocols and procedures, and federal laws and regulations governing record keeping requirements.

Nearly 2,100 emails contained in Clinton's server were retroactively marked classified by the State Department, though none of the emails were marked classified at the time they were sent. 65 were later classified as "secret", more than 20 were designated "top secret", and the rest were later designated as "confidential".

However, the intelligence community's inspector general wrote Congress to say that some of the emails "contained classified State Department information when originated."

In a joint statement released on July 15, 2015, the inspector general of the State Department and the inspector general of the intelligence community said that through their review of the emails, they found information that was classified when sent, remained so as of their inspection, and "never should have been transmitted via an unclassified personal system." They also stated unequivocally that those secrets never should have been stored outside of secure government computer systems. Mrs. Clinton had stated over a period of months that she kept no classified information on the private server that she set up in her house.

Government policy, reiterated in the nondisclosure agreement signed by Clinton as part of gaining her security clearance, is that sensitive information can be considered as classified even if not marked as such.[394] After allegations were raised that some of the emails in question fell into the so-called "born classified" category, an FBI probe was initiated regarding how classified information was handled on the Clinton server. In May 2016, the inspector general of the state department criticized her use of a private email server while she was secretary of state stating that she had not requested permission to use it and even if she had, she would not have been given permission.

The controversy occurred against the backdrop of Clinton's 2016 presidential election campaign and hearings by the House Select Committee on Benghazi.

Perhaps the plan is to quietly indict Mrs. Clinton, have her plead guilty to violation of email regulations, pay a $10,000 fine, and then move on with the presidential race. Bill Clinton was actually impeached for committing perjury in 1998, but simply went on with his presidency. He was disbarred by the Supreme Court, but that didn't really matter either.

Update: 06/07--It seems Hillary Rodham Clinton has wrapped up the Democratic nomination. It's the best possible time for FBI Dir. Comey and the DOJ to indict Mrs. Clinton, without affecting the primary (it's in the past), or the general election (it's as far into the future now, as it's ever going to be). Assuming the DOJ's goal is not to affect America's presidential selection process.

Update: 6/08: Donald Halper from the Weekly Standard, says Donald Trump will deliver a major speech on Monday, in which he will say Secretary of State Clinton turned the State Department into her own private hedge fund. She collected money from the Chinese, the Russians, the Saudis, in the form of donations to the Clinton foundation, which employed her husband former President Bill Clinton. "The Clinton's left the White House broke. The Clinton foundation made them wealthy."

Smug or indicted? You decide

He says he doesn't know whether any government agency has investigated this, but that it probably constitutes a violation of American law.

See also

No Defeat, No Surrender for Bernie Sanders. http://www.smobserved.com/story/2016/06/08/news/no-surrender-sanders-vows-to-continue-campaign-will-not-drop-out-wont-concede-nomination/1374.html

Clueless Thugs: Bernie Sanders Supporters beat other Sanders supporters in error. http://www.smobserved.com/story/2016/06/08/news/bernie-supporters-beat-other-bernie-supporters-by-mistake-youtube/1379.html

Republican Ballots apparently not counted in Santa Monica, http://www.smobserved.com/story/2016/06/08/news/become-a-republican-in-santa-monica-and-have-your-vote-demoted/1377.html