More than 900,000 people live in Nova Scotia.

Imagine if even one-quarter of them could be convinced to take just one photo or short video on a single day and share it with everyone else.

Put it all together, and you'd have A Day in the Life of Nova Scotia: 2014.

It's been done before, but never quite the way we're going to do it. And we need your help more than ever.

First, some background:

In 1993, CBC's First Edition dispatched TV cameras across the province to shoot vignettes. We saw the leader of the opposition, John Savage, shaving; a judge donning his robes; an emotional bride walking down the aisle; a baby's first breath. The piece felt like a love letter to the province.

Anyone look familiar?

The original A Day in the Life of Nova Scotia was shot in March 1993. Scenes include a bride and groom, hockey players, a woman in labour, toddlers — dozens of people in all. Let us know if you or someone you know was in the original piece. We'd love to catch up.

Now, 21 years on, CBC Nova Scotia will do it again.

But this time, most of the images will come from you.

On Oct. 17, we want you to show us your Nova Scotia. Whatever you're doing that day, whoever you're with, share a moment in time with us — and thousands of friends you haven't met yet.

Imagine 24 hours of shared experiences, preserved in a virtual tapestry.

You'll be able to contribute video and stills using email and social media, including YouTube, Facebook, Twitter and Instagram. For the first time, you'll also be able to watch the images uploading live, to see what everyone else is contributing to the project.

We'll have more details on the mechanics of all this as Oct. 17 draws closer.

For now, we’re hoping your imagination runs wild. What part of Nova Scotia will you share?

Stay tuned for Oct. 17: A Day in the Life of Nova Scotia.

On Monday, we asked for help identifying a baby girl born on March 12, 1993. Her birth was a highlight of CBC's A Day in the Life of Nova Scotia: 1993, which was shot on that day.

Late this afternoon, her dad called the newsroom to say he remembers the shoot vividly. His daughter's name is Emily and she's still living in Halifax.

We'll catch up with Emily and her family on Oct. 17, when we shoot A Day in the Life of Nova Scotia: 2014.