Always ready and always on, the Aimpoint PRO Patrol Rifle Optic provides 2 minutes of angle red dot for accurate target engagement at all distances.

A hard-anodized 30mm tube was utilized, enclosing a high efficiency circuit that allows the Aimpoint Pro to be turned on and left on for up to three years using a single battery. The front lens utilizes a unique band-pass coating, which allows the sight to be used with all generations of night vision devices. The modular QRP2 mount includes a removable spacer that indexes the sight at the optimal height for co-witness with the standard iron sights on AR15/M16/M4 Carbine style weapons. This spacer can be removed to enable the use of the sight on police shotguns or sub-machineguns. The QRP2 mount also incorporates a torque-limiting twist knob that provides the optimal level of pressure on the rail while completely eliminating the possibility of over-tightening.



Both the front and rear lenses are recessed within the sight body to provide protection against impact damage, scratches, and fingerprints. Flip covers are included on the Aimpoint Pro to further protect the lenses, and a transparent rear lens cover is utilized allowing the user to engage a target with the lens covers closed in an emergency situation. A two Minute of Angle (2 MOA) red dot is utilized to allow maximum accuracy at all distances and under all environmental conditions.

2 minutes of angle red dot for accurate target engagement at all distances

In service date and battery change date reminders makes inventory tracking and maintenance easy

Enhanced speed on target and increased first shot hit probability when compared to iron sights and magnified scopes

Compatible with all generations of night vision devices and may be used with Aimpoint 3X Magnifier and Concealed Engagement unit

Hard anodized aluminum alloy housing. Rugged enough for real world conditions and waterproof to 150 feet

Threaded front lens opening allows use of screw-in-anti-reflection device (ARD)

Standard Picatinny Rail & Spacer for AR15/M4 Carbine application included

More Features of the Aimpoint Pro

Front and rear flip covers keep lenses clean

Transparent rear flip cover allows use of the sight (with both eyes open) even with both covers closed in an emergency

Battery and adjustment cap retainer straps means you will never lose your pieces

Modular mount set up for use on flat-top AR15, M4 Carbine and M16 rifles. (Adapter available for carry handle mounting)

Removable spacer. Remove for use on shotguns and sub-guns

QRP2 rail grabber mount. Snap knob three times for a perfect mount. Will not deform your rail like many other mounts

Recessed lens openings helps prevent against impact damage, fingerprints and scratches

Standard features for all Aimpoint® sights

Unlimited field of view

Parallax-free and unlimited eye relief

Unaffected by extreme weather conditions

Rugged, durable construction

No hazardous materials

No laser emission that could be harmful to your eyes

Increased aiming confidence

CLICK HERE FOR OPTIC DATA & SPECIFICATIONS +