Money to provide for his family has been Daniel Vidot's motivating force throughout his career but the hulking winger has revealed that 12 months in England convinced him that it was more important to be close to them.

Leaving English Super League club Salford with a year still to run on his contract, Vidot has taken a major pay cut in order to return to south-east Queensland but with the blessing of his mother is adamant that it is the right decision.

Vidot's cut-price two-year contract with the Titans was last week registered by the NRL and sees the former Raider, Dragon and Bronco return to the NRL with 53 tries from 111 games to date.

The 26-year-old spoke prior to his departure for England that leaving the NRL was the best thing for his mother, stepdad and four siblings whom he provided financial assistance to but has come to the realisation that being close to loved ones is more important than money.

"It was one of those things where I went away for the money to help the family out but there were times where I was homesick and just thinking about the family too much and I was missing them," Vidot told NRL.com.

"It became a thing where time with my family was more important than the money. That's why I made my decision to come back.

"It was obviously a massive move for me being on the other side of the world but I knew what I was doing it for and I was happy at the start.

"A few months over there it kind of started kicking in and when I got back after the season it became a thing where I thought whether I could do that again.

"Obviously I was missing my mother a lot and that's what drove me to come back.

"I came back at Christmas and my little nephew was starting to walk and talk and stuff like that and it kind of got me.

"After that Christmas period when I returned to England I had a big think about things and the opportunity at the Titans came up and me being from south of Brisbane I took it with both hands."

Vidot agrees to terms with Titans

Titans Nines hopes suffer further blow

Ryan James re-signs with Titans

Lure of a premiership keeps James at Titans



In addition to the offer from the Titans there were a number of Sydney-based clubs who expressed interest in bringing Vidot back to the NRL but the Samoan international said the tyranny of distance made the Titans the most appealing alternative.

Head coach Neil Henry and head of high performance Matt Ford were both at the Raiders when a sometimes wayward Vidot made his way through the junior grades but he says time and his experience in England have reinvigorated his desire to play to his potential.

Former Raiders coach David Furner once revealed that Vidot showed more interest in acting in local plays than training at times but he has set the highest goal possible with his new club.

"I want to get a premiership. I haven't come here to muck around," Vidot said.

"I reckon we'll definitely be contenders for the premiership this year. We're not here to make up the numbers, I reckon the boys are ready to dig in and we're looking good out there on the park.

"I was having a watch at them at the end of last season and they were getting some really good wins. There was lots of signs of life there and with the boys we've got, we've got the talent there to do it.

"I definitely had to take a pay cut to come back but those are the things I talked to my family about. I had a good chat to my mum about it but I think it was the right thing to do.

"I wasn't entirely happy over there, I got quite homesick at times but since I've been back I've been buzzing and my work ethic on the field has been a lot better than what it was in England.

"I'm really looking forward to the season and getting back into the NRL."