It looks like the American Association for the Advancement of Science is transforming itself into a partisan special interests group:

AAAS, the world’s largest general scientific organization, announced Thursday that it will partner with the March for Science, a nonpartisan set of activities that aim to promote science education and the use of scientific evidence to inform policy.

I suppose we should not be surprised by this effort to make science more political. Consider who is in charge of the AAAS:

AAAS CEO Rush Holt said, “AAAS will encourage and support its members and affiliate organizations to help make the March for Science a success. We see the activities collectively known as the March as a unique opportunity to communicate the importance, value and beauty of science. Participation in the March for Science is in keeping with AAAS’ long-standing mission to ‘advance science, engineering and innovation throughout the world for the benefit of all people.’”

According to Wiki:

Rush Dew Holt Jr. (born October 15, 1948) is an American politician who was the U.S. Representative for New Jersey’s 12th congressional district from 1999 to 2015. He is a member of the Democratic Party.

Holt is not politically moderate, but represents the extreme left wing of the Democratic Party:

As a Congressman, Holt maintained liberal viewpoints on several major issues, and consistently voted accordingly. For example, he supported abortion rights, opposed the privatization of Social Security, and supported a public health care option…..In 2009, the National Journal rated him as one of the eight most liberal members of the House of Representatives.[37] Holt’s rankings released by various interest groups reflect his liberal views. Since 2009, he has been rated 100 percent in accordance with the interests of the following interest groups, among others: American Public Health Association, Americans for Democratic America, and NARAL Pro-Choice America.[38] Holt was a member of the New Democrat Coalition and the Congressional Progressive Caucus.

I’m shocked, shocked I tell ya, that an extreme lefty from the Democratic Party would lead the AAAS into partnering with the Science Against Trump March for Science.

But it gets a little more interesting.

If you click on the red Donate button for the March for Science, you will learn that:

ScienceDebate.org is the fiscal sponsor of the March for Science

And check out your url. When you clicked on “Donate” you were redirected to the ScienceDebate.org webpage.

What is a fiscal sponsor?

Using a fiscal sponsorship arrangement offers a way for a cause to attract donors even when it is not yet recognized as tax-exempt under Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3). In essence the fiscal sponsor serves as the administrative “home” of the cause. Charitable contributions are given to the fiscal sponsor, which then grants them to support the cause.

I see. So by donating to the March for Science, you are donating to ScienceDebate.org.

So who is running that show?

One of the co-founders is none other than atheist activist Lawrence Krauss, the extremist who argues that teaching children creationism is child abuse and argues that religion is bad for society.

But that’s not the interesting thing to note. Is it that that another founding member is a contributing editor for the anti-religious The Skeptical Inquirer?

No.

Check out the Advisory Committee:

Rush Holt, CEO, American Association for the Advancement of Science; Executive Publisher, Science magazine; Former Democratic congressman from New Jersey

Hmmm. So the recent ex-politician who heads the AAAS has helped steer the AAAS into supporting the political March for Science. This will likely increase donations for the March, which means more money being sent to ScienceDebate.org, the organization that Holt himself is part of as its Advisory Committee.

Advertisements