0 SHARES Facebook Twitter Google Whatsapp Pinterest Print Mail Flipboard

With an arrest expected as early as Monday in Robert Mueller’s escalating investigation into the Trump campaign’s ties to Russia, Donald Trump escaped the White House on Saturday, reportedly wearing his standard golf outfit and shoes.

Per pool: POTUS left the White House “wearing a white hat, dark jacket, white shirt and what may prove to be golf shoes.” — Kyle Griffin (@kylegriffin1) October 28, 2017

A short time later, Griffin confirmed, the president arrived at his club in Sterling, Virginia – the fourth straight weekend that Trump has left his job in Washington to hit the links.

Per pool, Trump has arrived at Trump Nat’l Golf Club in VA. This is his 76th day at a golf club, 96th day at a Trump property as president. — Kyle Griffin (@kylegriffin1) October 28, 2017

According to the MSNBC producer, citing the press pool, Trump’s motorcade was met with a protester at the entrance of the club, holding a sign that said, “Impeach.”

Pool: As Trump’s motorcade passed, “a lone protester stood at the entrance holding a handwritten sign that said: ‘Impeach.'” https://t.co/HVjK8FQUmZ — Kyle Griffin (@kylegriffin1) October 28, 2017

Trump’s visit to his Virginia golf club marks his 76th day golfing and 96th day at one of his properties during his short 10 months in the White House. For those keeping score at home, that means Trump has spent 27 percent of his time as president golfing and more than a third hiding out at one of his lavish properties.

Trump’s poor work ethic is stunning given how harshly he criticized former President Barack Obama’s golf habits during the campaign. The current president even repeatedly promised that, if elected, he wouldn’t have time to golf and probably would rarely even leave the White House.

Over the past ten months, virtually the opposite has been true as Trump’s frequent travel outside of Washington – often to one of his own properties – has all but bankrupted the U.S. Secret Service.

His latest golf outing on Saturday comes after the explosive news that the first charges in Robert Mueller’s Russia investigation have been approved and an arrest could come as early as Monday. In his early morning tweets, Trump made no mention of the new developments.

Instead, Trump prefers to bury his head in one his sand traps and pretend all of this is fake news.

If you’re ready to read more from the unbossed and unbought Politicus team, sign up for our newsletter here! Email address: Leave this field empty if you're human: