Karben4 Kraziness, Fresh Releases, and More!

Wednesday, October 22th 2014 Dear Ray's Craft Beer Lovers, It's going to be a great week in the Ray-borhood! Karben4 is coming to town this Saturday to show off their new, Growler Gallery proprietary IPA called RAY-ley's Comet, CT Melm's will be stopping by this Thursday (tomorrow!) for a meet and greet in the Gallery, and if that's not enough a whole slew of seasonal gems are popping up daily downstairs! There's lots of good stuff packed into this week's newsletter, so lets just jump in!

Cheers, -Kaleb, Uncle Ray & the Gang PS: As I'm writing the newsletter this morning, a BUNCH of great beer just got delivered, so swing by Facebook and Twitter later to see all the goodies! Things in this Newsletter: Weyerbacher Imperial Pumpkin 3 Sheeps Harvest Ale Destihl Here Gose Nothing Goings on in the Growler Gallery Save the Dates! Weyerbacher Imperial Pumpkin

It's that time of year and pumpkin beers are everywhere. But with a whole plethora to choose from, which one should you use to celebrate the season? I personally tend to gravitate towards the big, rich, and hearty pumpkin brews with a serious spice component to them. And this one definitely fits the bill. Weyerbabcher's Imperial Pumpkin Ale clocks in at over 8% ABV (but it is well hidden) and is layered with luscious malts and rich spices. It pours out a burnt umber color and is capped off by a pillowy, white head that settles, leaving behind light lacing. The aroma is predominantly of spice and chewy caramel with a hint of baked pumpkin. It starts off with a strong ale flavor and malty sweetness that transitions into a spicy mid-palate of cinnamon, nutmeg, and cloves. The spices follow through into the finish and are backed by a light presence of baked pumpkin. It finishes dry, but with enough pumpkin pie spice to keep you coming back for more. 3 Sheeps Harvest Ale

This beer has three good things going for it: it is fresh, Fresh, FRESH! Oh, and the fresh hops came from a local farm, so I guess that's four good things! And when I say fresh, I mean it. Bottles were just delivered this morning at 9:28am after being shipped down from the brewery. Not only are the bottles fresh, but what went into the bottles was super fresh as well! When I was chatting with James and Grant from the brewery, they talked about how they got the centennial hops for this beer from a local farm and tossed them into the beer within 24 hours of harvesting! The beer is rich amber in color with an off-white head and light lacing. Its aroma is bready and biscuity with a healthy heaping of hops that are grassy, piney, and slightly citrusy. The hefty malt backbone supports the hops with enough sweetness to balance out the bitterness. This beer drinks beautifully and is another solid release from the boys up in Sheboygan! #freshisbest Destihl's Wild Sour 'Here Gose Nothing'

When we received this beer last week we didn't exactly know what we were getting ourselves into. We knew that Destihl crafts world-class sours, but haven't had a chance to try any of them because they've never made it north of the Illinois border before. So when this bright green can rolled in off the truck, all of the beer dudes immediately swarmed into the back room and cracked into a can. Oh. My. I'm a sucker for a good sour and this one blew me away. This is the first offering in the "Wild Sour Series" called "Here Gose Nothing". It was brewed in the style of a Leipzig Gose that incorporates salt and coriander to craft this old-world style sour. The aroma is beautifully tart with zested lemons and backed by a subtle herbal quality from the coriander. It drinks clean and crisp with a full mouthfeel, which benefits from an addition of oats (the traditional gose is made with at least 50% wheat in the malt bill, but I'm not sure what went into this one). There is a nice minerality mid-palate from the salt that is quickly squeegee'd off of the tongue by sharp acidity. It is so thirst quenching and refreshing that I think I found my new favorite summer beer... and fall beer... and winter beer... Who am I kidding, this is going to be one of my year-round fridge staples. This is just the first release in a series of some great sours. So keep on the look out for these other colorful cans! Goings on in Ray's Growler Gallery LLC www.raysgrowlergallery.com

Get your fresh news about the freshest beer! C.T. Melms Meet and Greet Thursday, October 23rd from 5-8ish

Milwaukee's oldest brewery is back and they are coming to Ray's Growler Gallery to show off their first two beers! This Milwaukee legend (you can read up on all the history here ) is being revived by a bunch of beer loving dudes, including local legend and homebrewing hero Brian Joas. Many of you will know Brian from his involvement with Beer Barons or his course for the Beer Judge Certification Program (being a Grand Master Judge himself means he knows a lil' bit about beer).

Their two current releases, Walker's Point Wheat and Czech Mate Imperial Pale Lager, have been fan favorites in the Gallery. Brian will be here, showing off these first two creations and answering any burning questions you might have about beer, brewing, or the history of beer in Milwaukee.

So drink local. Love Wisconsin beer. And support the resurgence of Milwaukee craft!

Pints and flights will also be available! So come and hang out and enjoy a bunch of great brews with like-minded beer lovers! Karben4 RAY-ley's Comet IPA Unveiling Saturday, October 25th (this Saturday) starting at 11am

Karben4 already crafts one of the best IPAs in the state with their Fantasy Factory, but they just took their hop game to the next level! They crafted a new batch of an IPA that features the new, experimental hop 'Comet'! To celebrate this beautiful, bitter brew, the folks from Karben4 are going to come out to the Gallery and kick things off in grand fashion! So come grab some great Karben4 brews and meet the dudes who crafted your new favorite IPA! Cheers, and see you there!



For the full draft list and pricing for the Karben4 event, please visit www.raysgrowlergallery.com on the day of. Save the Date! These are two days that you definitely want to mark on your calendar! An Unmissable Beer Dinner

Hosted by Kyle Cherek at The Rumpus Room

Wednesday, November 5th at 6:30pm

Once an understated source of beer and comfort food, gastropubs have become a national dining trend. Join Kyle Cherek, host of Wisconsin Foodie, for a dynamic evening of food and stories, tracing how a London pub and a handful of progressive young chefs turned simple, British pub cooking on its ear and inspired a dining trend so popular it bridged the Atlantic. Enjoy a delicious four-course dinner by Executive Chef Guy Davies, complete with beer pairings at The Rumpus Room, one of Milwaukee's foremost gastropubs.





or

Visit the Website Here To reserve your seat please call: 414.292.0100or Solemn Oath Gallery Gala and Halloween Party! Save

10%

Off -Weyerbacher Imperial Pumpkin 4 Packs

-3 Sheeps Nimble Lips #4 Harvest Ale 22oz

-Destihl Here Gose Nothing 4 Packs Offer Expires: Wednesday, October 29th at 9pm Thanks again for subscribing to and reading Ray's craft beer newsletter. If you have any questions, comments, or suggestions, please feel free to email me at kaleb@rayswine.com.



Lastly, for up to the minute beer arrivals and release information, be sure to follow us on Twitter and Facebook.

Cheers!

Kaleb & the gang at Ray's







