news

・2016.02.08 This site opened .

・We love the dillinger escape plan

movie

■ Panasonic Youth / DEP LAB @2015.01.10 soundstone at Tokorosawa Saitama Japan







■ Setting fire to sleepin' giants / DEP LAB@ 2016.07.30 soundstone at Tokorosawa Saitama Japan





■ Setting fire to sleepin' giants / DEP LAB@2016.01.30 stdio NOAH

■ Panasonic Youth / DEP LAB@2016.01.30 stdio NOAH

■ Baby's First Coffin' / DEP LAB@2014.11.15 stdio NOAH















about

LtoR:

uchida(Gt)

適切な音の解析と立ち上がりがゆっくりした感情的なギタープレイが得意。あまり歪ませたギタープレイは苦手。DEP LABでは氏の良さがつぶされてしまっている！ He is good at the analysis of the appropriate sound and the emotional guitar play that a start was slow. He is weak in the guitar play of the sound distorted.His good point is lost in DEP LAB！

yohsuke(Vo)



抜群の歌唱力でメロディを歌い上げることが得意。シャウトやデス声は苦手。DEP LABでは氏の良さがつぶされてしまっている！ He is good at singing a melody in a loud voice by outstanding singing ability. He is weak in a shout and the death voice. His good point is lost in DEP LAB！

noriaki(Dr)



変拍子かつ手数が多くても正確に叩ける高い演奏能力を持つ。解析の精度も高い。ただ、アラフィフ迎えてのDEPLABでの激しいドラムプレイは体力的にキツそう！ He has high performance ability to be able to beat strange time and the small beat exactly. And he has high analysis precision of the performance, too. But It seems to be physically severe on the intense drum play in DEPLAB because He reached age of around 50!

asami(Gt)



ザ・ハードロック大好き人間で単音リフが得意。テンションコードやクロマチックスケールは苦手。テンションコードやクロマチックスケールが多用されているDEP LABでは氏の良さがつぶされてしまっている！ He is good at a single sound riff in the hard rock addicts. He is weak in a tension cord and the chromatic scale.His good point is lost in DEP LAB where a tension cord and chromatic scale are used many for!

koh(Ba)



丁寧・的確な歌うベースプレイでポップな音楽が得意。DEPLABはポップな音楽ではないので氏の良さがつぶされてしまっている！ The base that you seem to sing is the characteristic of his performance. And he is good at pop music.because DEPLAB is not pop music,his good point is lost!

band



2005年結成。初めてカバーできた曲はbaby's first coffin'、バンドで演奏できるようになるまで1年半かかりました。何しろコピーバンドをやりたかったので、どうせ組むなら誰もやらないようなコピーバンドを組もうと思ってD.E.P.のコピーをやっています。 We have formed in 2005. The music that We was able to cover for the first time is baby's first coffin'. It took one and a half years until We became able to play it in a band.Anyway we wanted to form a cover band. Therefore we thought to form the cover band which nobody form if we do it at all. So we continue covering D.E.P.

links

We Love

The Dillinger Escape Plan ： It is the band of the origin of cover.





MORE BANDS WITH DEPLAB MEMBERS

Re-NacL ： official site. The band which Asami(Gt.) participates in.

mugbum ： official site. The band which Asami(Gt.) participates in as a bassist.















Connect

DEPLAB−Facebook ： Facebook Page

