WASHINGTON, June 24, 2014 – Let’s set the stage. As the politically correct, faux-Marxist college campus environment continues to deteriorate, average American families—and students—are beginning to seriously question just what they’re getting in return for enslaving themselves to increasingly inflated tuition bills.

It’s a big problem for college men in particular. In addition to having to maintain and increase both grade point averages and personal alcohol tolerance in a competitive environment, they also are required to behave like celibate monks when it comes to interacting with the opposite sex.

READ ALSO: Conservatives: The real persecuted minority on campus



That’s because all college men, particularly those of the Caucasian persuasion, are viewed by college administrators and professional campus feminists as feral, potential rapists.

Such idiocy is apparently ready to jump the shark in the People’s Republic of California, as reported by David Bernstein. He’s writing for the Volokh Conspiracy, which now, mirabile dictu, appears online in the Washington Post. We excerpt Bernstein’s opening observations here:

Cathy Young has an excellent column in Reason.com about a bill in California that would require universities in that state to use an “affirmative consent” standard for evaluating sexual assault complaints in the campus disciplinary system for complaints involving students.

READ ALSO: The campus rape culture exists; be ready to fight it



Two obvious questions arise:

(1) Why just on campus? If this is a good idea, why not make it part the tort system? If that’s too drastic, let’s start, with say, members of the California legislature. For internal disciplinary purposes, their sexual activity should be governed by the same standard they want to impose on students. What plausible grounds could they have for rejecting application of a standard they would impose on students to themselves? (2) If we’re limiting things to campus, why just students? Why should students be judged under this standard, but not faculty and administrators? It’s hardly unheard of for professors, administrators, and even law school deans to engage in sexual relationships of dubious morality. The answer is that it’s not a good idea, and it’s a product of the current moral panic over the hookup culture.

Bernstein actually captures the spirit of the lunacy here. Even better, however, is the beyond-funny video-satire he links to at the end of his commentary.

If you think, like we do, that this whole campus dating/hookup issue has gotten way beyond control, this video will provide the appropriate sendup. Watch it all. The fun will sneak up on you.