The Habit Calendar is a tangible tracking tool to monitor the small habits that make you feel like a sane human.



Here's how it works

Write the habits you want to track in the left column.

Check off the habits you've completed at the end of every day.

BOOM! You are so impressive and accomplished! Way to go, champ!



Here's why it's awesome

The Habit Calendar is a physical thing -- no buzzing, alerts, or screens required. It acts as a visual cue (next to your bed, on your fridge, or wherever you want to put it) to remind you to think about your habits every day.

It acts as a visual cue (next to your bed, on your fridge, or wherever you want to put it) to remind you to think about your habits every day. You get that satisfying feeling of checking something off your to-do list . Sometimes the only motivation you need to floss or stick to your bedtime is knowing you can check that box at the end of the day.

. Sometimes the only motivation you need to floss or stick to your bedtime is knowing you can check that box at the end of the day. Once you have a few check marks in a row, you won’t want to break your streak.

The Habit Calendar helps you stay accountable to yourself. It’s one thing to talk about making a change, but actually writing it down on paper makes you more committed to it.

Deciding which habits to track

We can help you there, too.

We asked our positive psychologist friends at Thrive At Work to help us create the Habit Calendar’s Habit Brainstorm Guide based on the latest scientific research about habits. They came up with a brilliant list of questions to help you get to the root of what habits would be the most meaningful to you. It’s free with the Habit Calendar or $5 as a stand-alone PDF.

Sneak peek of the Habit Brainstorm Guide

The Habit Brainstorm Guide will also feature a list of example habits to get your creative juices flowing

Product Details

Note: Some things are different from the prototype in the video! For example, the actual calendar will be a touch bigger (more room for writing!) and the spiral coil will be white.

8" x 10"

Soft-touch cover that feels awesome

Monthly themes to inspire you

Nail hole and calendar hook so you can display it however you'd like

Undated so you can start anytime and use it for a full year

Printed on 100% recycled paper from French Paper Company, a third-generation paper mill in Michigan

Made in the USA (in Cleveland, Ohio, to be exact)

Stretch Goal Unlocked!

Y'all have totally blown us away, and we want to say THANK YOU with a bonus gift!

Since we've surpassed our stretch goal of $15,000, we’ll include 3 coloring prints from our mantra coloring book, You Got This! They are printed on sturdy paper stock so that you can use heavy duty coloring supplies and share/frame them when you’re done! Perfect for some holiday de-stressing!

3 of these prints could be yours!

Where did this idea come from?

The idea came to me while I was reading Gretchen Rubin's The Happiness Project. Her emphasis on habits as a force for change really resonated with me. I started thinking about the habits that are most important to me and how I could do a better job of keeping myself accountable to them. I created a rough mock-up that my friends and I have been using for two years. I asked my friends Nicole Melville (art) and Trish DiFranco (words) to contribute their talents and here we are!

Rewards!

Back the project now to get one, two, three, five, or ten Habit Calendars! You can also get the PDF version of our brainstorm guide for $5.

We'll be sending out rewards the first two weeks of December so they arrive for the holidays!

Thank you so much for taking the time to learn about our project! We can't wait to hear what you think about the Habit Calendar! Yay!

P.S. It would mean so much to us if you helped spread the word. You can share our project on Facebook, Twitter, and... anywhere else, really. :) Thank you!

Let's be friends!

Our website | Instagram | Facebook | Twitter | Pinterest