0 Couple unknowingly drives onto interstate with drunk man on trunk

A drunk man passed out and went for a ride on the trunk of a stranger's car down a busy Memphis interstate, and neither the drunk man nor the driver knew it.

He is lucky, to say the least. The man crawled up on the back of the car with a trunk that's only about 14 inches wide.

Thankfully, an Memphis Police Department officer spotted him, but not before he went on a ride that he doesn't remember. On the other hand, it’s a trip the driver will never forget.

"There's no way to describe it. It's unbelievable," Carl Webb told FOX13 Memphis.

Webb and his wife were leaving Barbecue Fest on Thursday night in downtown Memphis. They had backed their car into a parking space at Carolina and Riverside.

"We came down the aisle, walked right to the car, opened it up on both sides then we got in the car."

It was dark out and Webb’s sunshade was stuck up, so he didn't see what was on his trunk. After driving about 14 miles, he was pulled over by police.

“The officer came up and he said, ‘Mister, are you aware there's a body on your trunk?' and that did not register. He goes, ‘Mister, I'm not messing with you. There's a body on your trunk.’ So I got out. We walked around and sure enough, there he was, still hanging on, still unconscious, just lying there.”

Webb had driven 14 miles with the uninvited and unaware passenger sleeping on his 14-inch-wide trunk.

"I have no explanation other than that little lip right there saved his life," he said.

The officer had to wake the man up. Webb said the man was so drunk, he started to stumble into traffic and the officer grabbed him.

Webb said he's just thankful for the officer's good police work.

“Good job man, good job. It was just outstanding,” Webb said.

Webb also has a message for the man who ended up on his trunk.

"I hope he takes a good look at where he put himself and the hazard that he had open up to himself. It would've been death."

The man was put in the cruiser, but there's no word on his identity or if he was charged with anything.

MORE FROM BOSTON 25 NEWS

Massive landslide blocks scenic California highway

Here's your complete guide to Boston Calling 2017

Pete Frates struggling to keep up with health care costs

© 2019 Cox Media Group.