Whether for work or for play, the Dell UltraSharpTM U2412M can deliver an unmatched viewing experience.

Clearly outstanding: Watch your graphics come to life on a vast 24" (61cm) LED-backlit screen featuring a crystal-clear 1920x1200 resolution on a 16:10 widescreen aspect ratio so you can’t lose screen area just because your customized applications support a different resolution.

resolution on a widescreen aspect ratio so you can’t lose screen area just because your customized applications support a different resolution. Contrasting view: Get ready for blur-free viewing with 2 million:1 (typical) high dynamic contrast ratio and 8ms with overdrive gray-to-gray (typical) response time that helps ensure crisp, sharp and ghost-free images.

Colorful character: Enjoy an amazing range of rich, dramatic and accurate colors, thanks to IPS technology designed to give you color consistency across a broad viewing angle and a wide color gamut at 82% (typical).

designed to give you color consistency across a broad viewing angle and a wide color gamut at 82% (typical). Superior Connectivity: This monitor includes a Display Port, DVI-D, VGA, and 2x USB connectors.

Your monitor, your style.

The ultimate in flexibility and customizability, the U2412M monitor can be adjusted to suit your workspace, tailored to suit your viewing preferences, and with its wide viewing angle, it can be viewed from almost any position.

Height adjustability: Raise or lower the U2412M to suit your workspace and your personal style with 115mm of height adjustability.

Versatile connectivity: Connect a keyboard, mouse and other peripherals via USB ports, DisplayPort and DVI ports that can deliver outstanding image quality when viewing HD content.

Maximum flexibility: Position your monitor just the way you like with comfort-enabling features like tilt, swivel and rotate. IPS (in-plane switching) technology helps ensure a great view from almost any angle.

Supreme adaptability: Make colors cooler or warmer to suit your preference with the color temperature slider, while ‘Text mode’ automatically adjusts screen brightness to 150 nits, ideal for reading text.

Shipping Note: Shipping to Alaska and Hawaii is not available for this item.

A physical address is required for delivery. No Military or PO Box shipments available

Warranty: 6 Months VSSI