So Grover Norquist wrote a letter to one of Pennsylvania's Republican state senators:

When is a fee a tax? When Grover Norquist says so. The Inquirer reported last week that anti-tax guru Norquist was the wizard behind the Oz-like fiscal contortions of the GOP-controlled state legislature, which has refused to consider raising revenue of any kind in the face of a massive debt. It was Norquist and his D.C.-based group, Americans for Tax Reform, who advanced the "no tax" pledge signed by hundreds of elected officials, including Gov. Corbett and 34 members of the Pennsylvania General Assembly. The state House - in keeping with Corbett's "no way, no how" to new taxes - has buried any proposals to place a levy on Marcellus Shale natural gas extraction. But this month Senate President Pro Tempore Joe Scarnati (R., Jefferson) bit the bullet and offered up a shale gas "impact fee" with proceeds funneled to affected areas. Over in the governor's office, Corbett remains unwavering in his campaign-era hard line over tax increases, but in recent months has shown some hint of openness - if not support - of the prospect of an "impact fee." Until now. Because Grover - arbiter of all things fiscal throughout the land - said so. The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette today reports that Norquist sent a letter to Sen. Mary Jo White (R., Venango) whose committee would have to consider the shale fee pronouncing it, in fact, a tax. “Make no mistake, this proposal is a tax increase based on any honest and objective analysis,” Norquist wrote. “As such, a vote in favor of Senate Bill 1100 also represents a violation of the Taxpayer Protection Pledge, a commitment which Gov. Corbett and 34 members of the legislature have made to their constituents to impose any and all efforts to raise taxes."

I wonder who voted for this guy. Oh, that's right: NOBODY. He's just the guy with all the corporate cash who can target you and take you down. So the politicians will do anything, no matter how immoral or unpopular, if Grover tells them to do it.

But let's look at the logical consequences of Grover's famous strong-arm tactics. Because of Grover Norquist, the man who's vowed to drown government in a bathtub, the lives of disabled Pennsylvanians are at risk. Via RIck Smith: