Alright, so I know everybody is waiting for this, and yes, we did have a conference with Elder Quentin L. Cook of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and it was incredible! There were in total 160 missionaries from the mission, all the way from Huesca to us all the way in Gandía and the Baleares. It was amazing. One thing that we all learned is that Apostles are still normal people. They don´t even know why they were called to be Apostles even to this day jaja. But Elder Cook talked to us about the importance of Preach My Gospel and he left us all with a small prophecy. He said that we are in Spain at this time, due to the economic crisis, because the people of Spain are ready for the Gospel. He said they are more humble, more open, and that this time is crucial for the Lord´s vineyard to flourish in Spain. He also left us with a blessing that EVERYBODY that we love and cherish will be taken care of. It was an amazing experience, and he wanted to shake each one of our hands. Incredible.

But in other sad news, Elaine did not get baptized because her mom is not letting her. Please pray for her still that she may be baptized! She shared her testimony the other day and she knows that the church is true! We need your prayers everybody. We need your love.

And not much happened this week, we talked to people, found a couple of people that are progressing, and Maricela, one of the recent converts in our area, her whole family has agreed to listen to our message and some of them have expressed interests in being baptized! The problem is their work schedule so we don´t have a lot of time to teach them, but please pray for her family that they may have time to meet with us.

Today for our pday we went to Catarroja, a town about 40 minutes away in train near Valencia. We played a turkey bowl with the whole Valencia Zone from Castellón and everywhere in between. It was fun, although Catarroja is not as pretty as Gandía. We have travelled so much this week… we are really tired, jajaja!