Wolfsburg's sporting executive Klaus Allofs says Kevin De Bruyne will stay at the club beyond the summer of 2015 amid new rumours over a Premier League return for the Belgium international.

De Bruyne, 23, signed for Wolfsburg last January on a five-year contract as he sought first-team football prior to the 2014 World Cup after failing to break into Chelsea's starting XI.

Following a settling-in period at the Volkswagen Arena, De Bruyne excelled after a full preseason with the Bundesliga club, scoring 14 and setting up a further 24 goals in 37 matches for his club.

De Bruyne has played a large part in the club's recent success, with Die Wolfe still in the German Cup and the Europa League and close to a Champions League return for the first time since 2009 as they sit second in the league.

The attacking midfielder's form has seen him linked with a move away from Wolfsburg, with his name mentioned as a potential successor to Bayern Munich's ageing wingers Arjen Robben and Franck Ribery.

Speculation has also been building over a return to Premier League with Manchester City reportedly interested in the Belgium international, but Wolfsburg -- partly due to the financial backing from Volkswagen -- have no need to sell their star player this summer.

De Bruyne scored once and had a hand in two more goals as Wolfsburg beat Freiburg 3-0 on Sunday.

"We want to play Champions League with VfL and establish ourselves among the best clubs in Germany, and we want to achieve that with the best players," Klaus Allofs told dpa. "We are currently building a squad, and don't think about who could leave us right now.

"His agent might have been approached, and that would only be normal. But it has no meaning, because both Kevin and his agent have said that VfL is the right club for him."

Allofs added that De Bruyne will stay beyond the summer of 2015, but admitted: "I don't know what will happen after that."

On Wednesday, Belgian news outlet HLN claimed that Paris Saint-Germain and Manchester City have reiterated their interest in De Bruyne, who could cost as much as €60 million.

Elsewhere, De Bruyne teammate Andre Schurrle has admitted that he is struggling for fitness following his €32 million transfer from Chelsea during the winter transfer window.

Schurrle is struggling for form and fitness since a big-money move from Stamford Bridge on transfer deadline day.

The Germany international has yet to find the back of the net for his new club and has seen his playing time reduced over the last few weeks, telling Sport Bild: "It'll be difficult this season, but I will pull through, I am not at 100 percent.

"My rhythm is missing. I realise that I did not have any preparation. I only had two weeks in the summer following the World Cup, and prior to my move in January I was unable to train for nearly fortnight with back problems."

The forward admitted that he is currently not fit to play a match every three days, and put it down to a different training style under Jose Mourinho.

"In England you win your fitness during the games," he added. "At Chelsea we played every three days. When you are in the team, you just do a bit of exercise in between. And if you don't play you also don't do a lot."