Get the biggest daily stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Throughout Welsh History Month, experts from Cadw and partners including museums, archaeological trusts and the Heritage Lottery Fund will bring stories from Wales’s rich and diverse heritage to life via a series of articles and never-before-seen images.

Deputy Minister for Culture, Sport and Tourism, Ken Skates, said: “Welsh History Month is an annual celebration of Welsh heritage and this visual depiction of our history is a great way to showcase the dramatic stories from our past.

“Our past is crucial in forming a sense of identity, as a nation, as individuals and as communities and we are always looking for new ways to engage people with their heritage. So I urge you to follow the series in the paper and online and get out and visit Wales’s unique historic sites this autumn.”

So have you been paying attention? Take our quiz below and to read the articles linked to each of the quiz take a look at the questions, which you can find after the quiz ...

Question - 1 of 24 Score - 0 of 0 Polly Groom’s Welsh History Month essay explored the ancient forests of the Welsh coast that were uncovered by storms earlier this year. But when does she note that the first inhabitants of Wales – the Neanderthals – arrived? (Image: Nigel Nayling) 100,000 years ago

230,000 years ago

1,200,000 years ago Next question Thanks for taking part in this quiz You scored Replay quiz

How did you do?

0-6: Hopeless historian

7-12: Amateur historian

13-18: Historian in the making

19-24: Welsh history buff

And here are the questions and linked the essays to go with the answers:

Q1: Polly Groom’s Welsh History Month essay explored the ancient forests of the Welsh coast that were uncovered by storms earlier this year. But when does she note that the first inhabitants of Wales – the Neanderthals – arrived?

Q2: Ffion Reynold's essay is all about Wales’s ancient passage tombs, including Bryn Celli Ddu on Anglesey. But on which day of the year does Cadw partner up with the Anglesey Druid Order to host a special dawn celebration at the Neolithic site?

Q3: Cadw’s recent CGI rebuild of Segontium Roman Fort in Caernarfon was the subject of Tristian Jones’ Welsh History Month essay . How many infantrymen could the fort hold back in its AD77 heyday?

Q4: Ruth Taylor-Davies’ essay discussed the new interpretative gates that have been installed at Caerphilly Castle. But which Welsh noble do they depict?

Q5: Anne Rainsbury explores how watercolour painter JMW Turner was inspired by his visits to Wales in her essay , but which Cadw site did the artist famously paint in 1794?

Q6: Lucy O’Donnell’s essay talked about the 20 Cadw sites located along the Wales Coast Path. But how long is the whole trail?

Q7: The once forgotten Dolforwyn Castle was the topic of former Cadw director Marilyn Lewis’ Welsh History Month essay . Which university undertook a joint venture with Cadw to excavate the site in the 80s and 90s?

Q8: Fine art conservator Jane Rutherford wrote her Welsh History Month essay on a long-lost painting uncovered at St Cadoc’s Church in the Vale of Glamorgan. What did the painting depict?

Q9: Rik Turner’s essay discusses how St Winefride’s Well Chapel in Flintshire was built over the great spring where, according to legend, St Winefride was executed. But how did she meet her grisly end?

Q10: Glashirfryn is the 450-year old mansion house being restored by Cadw, as discussed in Bill Britnell’s essay . But what was the house once described as in the biography of resident John Jones and his family?

Q11: Richard Sugget’s essay investigated how Bishop William Morgan’s home Ty Mawr Wybrnant has been dated to 1564 using the latest scientific techniques. But what is Bishop Morgan most famous for?

Q12: Cadw’s Kate Roberts wrote her essay about Parys Mountain, Anglesey. The impressive landscape was once the world’s largest mine of what substance?

Q13: Judith Alfrey and Laurence Smith’s essay explored the recent regeneration projects around Caernarfon waterfront. One of the gates in the iconic castle’s town walls is called Porth yr Aur, but what does this translate to?

Q14: Judith Alfrey discussed how Cadw is funding a new life for Welsh chapels in her essay , but what modern function is Burnett’s Hill Chapel in Pembrokeshire now used for?

Q15: Kate Roberts’ second Welsh History Month essay explores Gwynedd’s slate industry. But which British monarch was a reportedly a keen tourist of Penrhyn Quarry?

Q16: Cadw director Kate Clark talked of her experiences during an archaeological dig at the Victorian Leighton Farm, Powys. But what distinctive shape are the piggeries that can be seen from the aerial photograph?

Q17: Polly Groom’s second Welsh History Month essay says that Cadw works with partners to investigate and protect a number of shipwrecks around Welsh shores. The Royal Charter sank off the coast of Anglesey in 1859, but what valuable cargo did it have on board?

Q18: A third Kate Roberts Welsh History Month essay discusses how the mighty Caernarfon Castle in Gwynedd is one of Wales’ proud World Heritage Sites. Which Victorian visionary campaigned to save the site when it fell into disrepair in the late 1800s?

Q19: What grade are the National Trust’s beautiful Dyffryn Gardens in the Vale of Glamorgan, as reported by Jen Park in her essay ?

Q20: Cadw has been running education project ‘Looking over Dylan’s shoulder’ for the Dylan Thomas centenary year. But which of Cadw’s castles does Dylan Iorwerth reveal was Dylan’s inspiration in his essay ?

Q21: How many Welsh servicemen were killed during WW1, according to Diane William’s Welsh History Month essay ?

Q22: Jon Berry’s essay focuses on a number of WW1 trenches that lie along the A55 near Bodelwyddan Park in Denbighshire. What were these trenches used for?

Q23: Ceri Thompson’s poignant Welsh History Month essay shared volunteer accounts from the Cambrian Disaster. 2015 will commemorate which anniversary of this disaster?

Q24: The final essay from Welsh History Month came from Judith Alfrey, who looked at the range of buildings Cadw has listed since its creation, which was in which year?

For more information about Cadw’s work, objectives and priorities and great ways to explore our heritage, visit www.cadw.wales.gov.uk/historicenvironment.