Asus and Nvidia Announce Purpose-Built Cryptocurrency Mining GPUs

Leading graphics processing unit (GPU) manufacturers Asus and Nvidia have announced the release of new GPUs targeting the cryptocurrency mining market.

Also Read: Sapphire Technology Announce Production of Graphics Cards Designed Solely for Cryptocurrency Mining

The Announcements Follow Sapphire Technology Becoming the First GPU Producer to Target Cryptocurrency Miners

GPU manufacturing giants Asus and Nvidia have announced the release of purpose-built graphics processing units specialized for cryptocurrency mining.

Taiwan-based manufacturer Asus is launching two graphics processing units designed specifically for cryptocurrency mining, with one unit claiming an increased hashrate of 36% when compared with GPUs that are not optimized for cryptocurrency mining. Both graphics processing units only feature a single display port, meaning that they have very limited functionality for conventional purposes. American-based Nvidia will release a single specialized GPU, and will not feature display outputs.

The announcements follow Sapphire Technology becoming the first GPU producer to manufacture a graphics processing unit exclusively for cryptocurrency mining. Sapphire Technology will offer five specialized units, none of which will feature display output hardware.

The recent explosion in price enjoyed by bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies has created a global surge in demand for mining hardware. The demand has resulted in GPU shortages in many countries, in addition to enormous price hikes. Retailers and manufacturers have been completely unable to meet demand, creating growing frustration among gamers.

Purpose-Built GPU Mining Hardware Will Allow Manufacturers to Meet Mining Demand Faster and Reduce Production Costs

The announcement that companies will be producing purpose-built graphics cards for cryptocurrency mining is likely designed to alleviate the flood of demand that is currently making it difficult for Asus and Nvidia’s loyal gamer customers to access their products. Producing limited functionality cryptocurrency mining specialized GPUs will also create an opportunity for the companies to cash in on the nascent cryptocurrency economy.

Although purpose-built GPU mining hardware will allow manufacturers to meet demand faster, and reduce production costs, the limited or nonexistent display functionality of the specialty GPUs will make cryptocurrency miners unable to flip their old hardware into the second-hand gaming market when making future upgrades.

With bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies continuing to make mainstream headlines daily, it is unlikely that consumer demand for graphics processing units will slow anytime soon. The production of GPUs that are purpose-built for cryptocurrency mining allows for manufacturers and retailers to more effectively manage demand, resolidify their gaming customers, and facilitates more efficient delivery of hardware to the cryptocurrency mining market. It is likely that mining-specific GPU production will enjoy considerable growth in coming years as greater cryptocurrency coverage in the mainstream media attracts an expanding industry demographic of ‘hobbyist’ miners.

Do you think that purpose-built GPUs for cryptocurrency mining will allow manufacturers and retailers to better meet graphics card demand? Share your thoughts in the comments section below!

Images courtesty of Shutterstock and Wikipedia

Want to create your own secure cold storage paper wallet? Check our tools section today.