The cycle started with Store Championships, as players faced off against their locals and friends. Later, players made the trip out to Regional Championships, making some great journeys, friends, and stories to tell down the road. National Championships quickly followed and the competition was even fiercer as people traveled from all over to attempt to claim the title. The cycle is nearing completion as the 2016 World Championship approaches. In November, pilots from across the galaxy will gather their squadrons and meet in Roseville, MN in order to determine who will claim the title of X-Wing™ World Champion.

A Competition to Remember

Our World Championships will be an unforgettable experience. We are extremely excited to see world-class competition as hundreds of passionate players make new friends and forge memories that will last a lifetime on the biggest stage. At its core, though, the World Championship is about finding the best player in the world for each of our competitive games. So, ask yourself a question. Can you outmaneuver the rest of the competition and be crowned the 2016 X-Wing World Champion?

Veteran Instincts

In addition to the fantastic items every attendee of the 2016 World Championships will receive, players who do well in the 2016 X-Wing World Championship will have a chance at these fantastic prizes:

Participation: Each player that participates in a 2016 World Championship event will receive a copy of the alt-art card The Inquisitor - a ruthless pilot who flies as if he is constantly on the heels of your foes. After the lunch break, each player in the X-Wing World Championship will receive two additional copies of this card! X-Wing World Championship will receive a challenge coin to commemorate their participation in the event! In addition, each player that plays in theWorld Championship will receive a challenge coin to commemorate their participation in the event!

Day 2 Participants: Each player receives a set of acrylic Weapons Disabled tokens. Locking a ship out of its ability to shoot is a powerful effect and these bright, reflective tokens are sure to remind both players when a ship is not able to bring its weapons to bear!

Top 16: Each player receives a set of metallic colored dice.

Top 8: Each player receives a set of acrylic maneuver templates. These clear frost templates are accented with a bright gold paint and will make a player truly stand out as one of the best in the world.

Top 4: Each player receives an uncut sheet of cards (not pictured) featuring the World Championship promo - The Inquisitor. Our prizes are usually either game components or collector’s items. This unique prize is both!

Winner: The X-Wing World Champion receives the 2016 X-Wing World Champion trophy and a one-of-a-kind playmat to showcase their achievements! Additionally, the Champion will receive The Greatest Prize in Gaming - the chance to design a card for X-Wing!

This and More

These fantastic prizes are not the only reward for attending the 2016 World Championships. Players will also be gaining cherished memories of intense matches, new friends, and the experience of competing at the highest level of play. Keep your eyes on our website for additional information about the event, including live streaming and more!