AN: So here it is, the moment that has been teased since chapter 4…I really hope it lives up to the hype.

Why did I agree to this?

That was the question that floated through Blake's mind as she tossed yet another blouse into what had become her; 'reject pile.' The pile was a large collection of different shirts, dresses, and blouses, all in varying colors and styles. What was alarming though, was the rate at which it grew as the Faunus sifted through her closet and dresser drawers which, at this point were half-empty. She had been at this for over an hour and had thus far found absolutely nothing that she deemed wearable for her dinner with Yang. Which was in, she checked her scroll, less than two-hours.

She tossed the handheld device over to her bed, not wanting to see its mocking digital-clock anymore. It was infuriating, how hard was it to find suitable clothes to wear out on a date?

Answer: Very.

She sighed as she placed her elbows down on the oak-dresser, her hands rubbing at her worn-out eyes. Maybe if I ask Yang nicely we can postpone, give me more time…She killed the idea before it fully formed. She couldn't do that, not when Yang had been so enthusiastic when she had agreed to the date earlier that morning.

She smiled softly as the memory played through her mind.

"Really?" Yang asked barely contained hope evident in her voice. "You'll go?"

"Yes," Blake had barely gotten the word out before Yang tackled her in a hug. Yang gave her a quick kiss as she pulled back, a smile that would rival the brightness of the sun on her face.

"Thank you, and don't worry! Tonight will be awesome!"

Blake didn't doubt that an evening with Yang would be ill-spent, if anything it would be as the blonde had so excitedly exclaimed; awesome.

"I just wish I had something to wear…"

Her eyes darted back to the pile of clothes that laid strewn about the floor, she sighed, head slamming down into the top of the dresser.

This is stupid; she thought as her head throbbed in a dull ache, Yang won't care what I'm wearing so long as I'm there. Blake knew that her thought was true, Yang in all honesty wouldn't care about what it was that she was wearing. But there in lied the rub, she knew Yang. She knew how Yang treated first dates and it was how the blonde treated practically everything else in her life.

Go big or go home.

That knowledge was what had the Faunus stressing out from the moment she had started to look through her wardrobe. She knew that Yang was going to go all out for tonight in an attempt to impress her and she wanted to do the same for her.

But how in the world do you dress to impress?

Blake had no idea.

She sighed again; she knew what she was going to have to do. Swallowing down what was left of her pride the Faunus turned towards her door, careful to sidestep the mountain of clothes that impeded her path.

She opened her door and cut left, heading down towards the living room mumbling to herself. "The things I'll do for Yang…"

"You want me to do what?" Weiss asked the question as she peered over the edge of the newspaper she had been reading at her Faunus teammate, her reading glasses having slid halfway down her nose.

Blake fidgeted in place, face red, her feline ears laid flat against her head another obvious sign of her embarrassment.

"I want you to help me pick out what to wear for my dinner with Yang…"

"That's what I thought you said," Weiss said as she folded the paper and placed it down onto the table, taking her glasses off she stored them away in their protective case. Only after the case snapped shut did she turn her gaze back to Blake. "Why come to me?"

"Simple, out of all of us you have the most experience with formal dinners an-"

Weiss laughed, "Please, I honestly doubt formal-business dinners are the same thing as going out on a dinner-date with Yang Xiao Long." When Weiss's eyes refocused on Blake the heiress was shocked to find the Faunus looking completely and utterly dejected. Realizing her mistake she quickly moved to make amends. "Look, Blake I didn't mean to laugh at you I was only just…"

"Please."

Weiss blinked, "What?"

Blake brought her eyes up then, amber iris's pleading silently with Weiss. "Please help. I'm not asking you to help with my make-up or hair, just the clothes. That's it."

Weiss's mouth worked wordlessly as she stared directly into her friends beseeching eyes, which in combination with her still pouty-Faunus ears gave her the exact look of a begging cat.

It's not fair; Weiss thought to herself, I live with a puppy, bear-cub, and a cat! And I'm in love with the puppy!

"Fine, I'll help," Weiss said after reclaiming her voice. "Just cut it out with the cat-eyes, I get enough of that kind of thing from Ruby!"

Blake did as told, her eyes and ears both perking up at Weiss's compliance, however reluctant. "Thanks, Weiss it means a lot."

"Yeah, whatever," Weiss said as she stood and walked over to where Blake stood in the threshold of the room, certain that she could see a smirk on her friends lips as they headed up stairs to her room. "Now show me what we've got to work with."

"So where are you guys going?"

Ruby asked the question as Yang finished putting the finishing touches on her hair. It had been a nightmare getting her wild and unruly mane in-line, but like always she had managed it. Yang observed herself in the mirror; maybe I should get a haircut… She shook her head, Nah.

She turned to face her sister. Ruby was sat on her bed, legs hanging over the side as she kicked them back and forth. "I've already told you, I'm not telling you."

"Oh come on!" Ruby pouted, "You guys are leaving in like fifteen minutes, I can keep my lips sealed for that long!"

Yang chuckled at her, "I'd believe you, but we both know that that isn't the case. And stop it with the puppy-eyes; we both know that I'm immune to your pout."

"I helped you pick out what to wear, the least you can do is tell me where you plan on taking her!"

Yang sighed, Ruby did have a point she had been very helpful.

"Fine, I'll tell you." She said, cutting Ruby off before she could cheer in victory, she quickly added on. "I swear though, if you spill the beans, I'll tell Weiss about your twelfth-birthday party."

Ruby gasped, "You wouldn't!"

Yang wished she had a camera to take a picture of the horrific expression that was on her sister's face. "Oh, but I would." She gave Ruby a wicked smile. "Are you still sure that you want to know?"

Yang loved her sister to death, she truly did, but she'd be lying if she said she didn't love watching her squirm every now and then. It's the best part of being an older sibling…

"Fine." Ruby finally agreed after several moments.

Yang knew that she would cave in, Ruby had always been too curious for her own good. Besides if she slips up I get to have a nice long laugh with Weiss…

"I called in a favor and got us a reservation at The Emporium."

Ruby gave a low whistle, "That's going to break the bank."

"I'm also getting half-off on all of the food."

"Won't be as bad then," Ruby nodded, "Must have been a pretty big favor for all of that though."

"You don't even want to know," Yang said, a sudden bout of nerves overcoming her. "Do you…do you think Blake will like it?"

Yang had been ecstatic when her partner had accepted her offer to take her to dinner tonight, but as the hour of their meal fast approached she felt herself getting more and more nervous. Something that was incredibly rare for the blonde. She needed tonight to be perfect, it absolutely had to be.

It has to make up for yesterday…

She knew that Blake had forgiven her for her transgressions the other day. She had felt the words as much as she had heard them as the Faunus had told them to her. But just because Blake had forgiven her didn't mean that she had forgiven herself. No, Yang doubted she would ever fully forgive herself for what had transpired the day before, but she would try; because Blake had asked her to.

Anything for her.

Tonight's dinner was step-one for the blonde on her road to self-redemption, and the thought of Blake not enjoying herself, even a little bit, at the restaurant was more than enough to make her stomach churn.

Maybe this wasn't such a good idea, doubts plagued Yang, distracting her as Ruby stood up and carefully made her way over to the blonde. The next thing Yang knew a slender arm had wrapped its way around her waist, a head of red-hair pressing against her chest.

"I'm sure that she'll love it and that she'll have a good time." Yang felt Ruby give her a squeeze with her good arm, "Just go and have fun Yang, don't worry about it."

Yang laughed, returning the embrace lightly as to not hurt Ruby's arm.

"I'm that obvious, huh?"

Ruby looked up at her, "Normally, no. But where Blake is involved you're like an open book."

"I just hope that she enjoys tonight." Yang mumbled, her doubts still lingering despite Ruby's reassurances, she wanted – needed - this to be perfect for Blake.

"Yang," Ruby sighed as she pulled away, silver eyes looking up into Yang's face. "I know that you think that there's a lot riding on tonight but there really isn't. Blake won't break up with you or think any less of you even if tonight goes horribly wrong; I know that you know that. So you just need to relax and have fun, otherwise neither of you will have a good time."

Yang nodded her head, what Ruby had just said did make a lot of sense. If she remained as she was and allowed her guilt and doubts to dictate her mood and actions then neither she nor Blake would enjoy the evening, and that most certainly wasn't what she wanted. No, what she wanted was to have a nice; somewhat fun, somewhat romantic dinner with her girlfriend. So that's what she was going to do, negative thoughts be damned.

"You've gotten way to good at this, you know that?" She gave Ruby a quick hug. "Thanks, sis."

"You don't have to thank me," Ruby returned the hug with her good arm. "Just promise me that you'll allow yourself to have fun tonight."

"I will, I promise." Yang hugged her little-sister closer.

"Well, I think that about does it." Weiss said as she stepped away from Blake, allowing the Faunus to inspect herself in the mirror.

Blake's eyes darted around her reflection, irises taking in how she looked in the long-sleeved-dress that Weiss had painstakingly helped her pick out. The dress was a deep-burgundy in color and its silky material clung to her upper-torso like a second skin - accenting her figure perfectly while still effectively leaving everything a mystery - it flowed all the way down her arms and to the onyx-colored belt that she wore tightened around her midriff. From there it loosened, cascading down in vertical ruffles before halting just below her knee, where her trademarked black-stockings came into effect hiding her well-toned legs from any unwanted onlookers.

"It's perfect," She smiled, turning to face Weiss. Her smile waned upon seeing the heiress staring at her with an almost critical-eye. "Is something wrong?"

Weiss shook her head, slowly walking from where she was to circle around Blake. "No, you're right it's perfect…but something's missing."

Blake was just about to point out the paradoxical nature of that statement when Weiss stopped and excitedly exclaimed: "That's it!" from behind, startling her.

"For the love of…" She whirled around on the other girl. "Give me a heart-attack why don't you!"

"Hold that thought," Weiss held up a thin-finger, "I have to go get something, I'll be right back!"

With that the heiress left the room, leaving a slightly agitated and dumbfounded Blake in her wake. Shaking off Weiss's erratic behavior Blake took a deep breath, focusing in on slowing her rapidly beating heart. She had managed to repeat the process ten times before Weiss came bounding back into her room, excitement that could rival Ruby's normal jovialness plastered all over her face. In her petite hands Weiss carried a medium sized white jewelry box, the Schnee family crest was embellished in its entire splendor on the sides.

Blake's eyes widened when she realized exactly why Weiss had run off to get the box. "Weiss, no. I-I couldn't possibly," She stammered, only to be silenced by her white-haired friend.

"Nonsense, of course you can." Weiss waved her concerns off with her hand as she set the box down upon the dresser, her thumb quickly flipping the latch open. "And if you're worried about these being some type of precious family heirloom, don't. This box is my personal collection."

Weiss turned her attention back to her. "Now then, turn around while I dig what I had in mind out of here." Weiss said, her attention turning back to the container that was overflowing with a vast array of trinkets and bobbles. Blake just watched, motionless, until Weiss looked back up, a scowl sculpted across her face. "I said to turn around!"

Hearing the beginnings of anger creeping into Weiss's voice and fearing that she may further enrage the heiress, which was something that she really wanted to avoid, Blake promptly did as instructed and turned around. Her eyes seeking out something to stare at that wasn't Weiss and her jewelry box. She soon heard the tell-tale sounds of rummaging, leaving her with little doubt that Weiss had returned to her previous task of searching through the box.

But for what though?

She certainly had no idea. Jewelry had never been something that the Faunus had really bothered herself with. Sure she had a couple of necklaces hanging around and a pair or two of earrings, but other than that, nothing. She had always preferred lying low, something that she found was more difficult when wearing something, such as gold or silver, which was designed to draw ones eye. However, for the purpose of the evening, she supposed she could let her preferences slide. Especially if Weiss was so adamant about pushing the matter.

"Found it," Weiss huffed from behind Blake, a fair bit of annoyance in her voice. "I swear, the next time Ruby goes through my things and doesn't straighten it back out…"

Blake smirked to herself. That explains that.

"Alright," The sound of Weiss's feet shuffling across the carpet caused her ears to twitch. "Stand still."

Blake did as she was told; remaining absolutely still as slender hands gathered up her onyx tresses and moved them aside. She sucked in a shallow breath as cool metal and even colder hands came into contact with the sensitive skin on the side of her neck.

"Sorry," The apology was mumbled.

A moment later Weiss pulled her hands away, leaving a light weight to settle around Blake's neck.

"Well, take a look." Weiss said as she stepped away, allowing Blake to turn around and once again inspect herself in the mirror that rested atop her dresser.

The newest addition to her wardrobe was a simple silver-chain necklace; that was made up of several interconnected rings that alternated from large thick loops to smaller more delicate-coils. All in all it was a modest affair, one that matched the rest of her clothing perfectly.

"It's beautiful," Blake brought her hand up, calloused fingers latching onto one of the larger links. The smooth surface of the silver-link cooled her fingers as she rolled it around, completely captivated by the pieces simple – yet majestic - beauty.

Weiss hummed, drawing Blake's eye from her reflection and to the heiress. Weiss stood with her arms crossed, hand resting against her chin appraisingly. Icy-blue eyes narrowed in thought.

"You can keep it if you like."

"Really?" Blake asked, cheeks turning slightly pink at just how fast she asked the question. Despite her aversion to jewelry she had to admit, she liked the necklace.

"It looks far better on you than it does on me." Weiss said, shrugging, "Not to sound vain but it's always been a little too simple for my tastes."

"Are you sure?" Blake asked, doing her best to keep her voice even. Should it betray her hopes.

"I am," Weiss nodded. "Besides, I can see how much you like it in your eyes. It'd be a crime for you not to have it."

Blake looked away, finding the floor to be quite interesting. Despite her team's best efforts random acts of kindness were still something that she struggled with. "Thank you."

"Don't mention it," Blake could hear the smile on the heiress's lips. "Now, what do you say we head down, I'm pretty sure I heard Ruby and Yang heading down stairs a few minutes ago."

Weiss's assumption was correct. Blake's Faunus ears had easily been able to pick up the sounds of footsteps and idle-chitchat as their respective girlfriends had walked past her room, even with her door closed shut.

"You go ahead."

"You sure?" Weiss asked brow knit in confusion, "I thought you'd be chomping at the bit to see Yang all dolled up."

The heiress was correct again, Blake was dying to see Yang. Despite her desire to see Yang though, she couldn't head down just yet. There was one last thing she needed to do.

"I am, I just have a few finishing touches to do with my makeup and I'll be down."

Weiss's eyes widened, realization coursing through her cold irises.

"Alright," Weiss nodded. "I'll see you down there then."

Blake watched as Weiss turned and left the room, taking her jewelry box with her and leaving the door slightly ajar as she went. Once the final traces of white left her vision she sighed, she had been dreading this part ever since she had started getting ready.

Taking a deep breath, she turned, feet carrying her towards her bathroom. Stepping inside her hand expertly flicked the light switch on; a soft humming filled her ears as the fluorescent light bulb flicked to life. Its soft welcoming light filled the space instantly.

Stopping in front of her vanity she pulled open the drawer, plucking out a selection of different bottles and tubes, she set them down on the counter. Looking up, she tilted her face to the right, inspecting the black and blue bruise that covered a fair portion of her cheek. It was an ugly blemish that stood out in stark contrast against her skins naturally fair complexion.

It was also something that she knew would stifle any enjoyment Yang might have while they were out. It's existence an unwanted reminder of what had transpired the day before. Ever since she had agreed to the date she had been channeling her Aura into the wound, not enough to tire her, but enough to hopefully rid herself of the hurtful imperfection. It had worked, but it was nowhere near gone.

She frowned, eyes doing their best to erase what remained of the mark by the force of sheer will. Realizing the futility of that particular exercise she sighed again, hands coming up to grab one of the tubes she had previously set aside.

Popping the lid open, she squeezed the bottle, allowing a small amount of flesh colored cream to spread across her fingers. Bringing her hand up, she smeared the concealer around the bruise, gritting her teeth around the small wave of pain that was born from the action.

The next several minutes passed by in a blur as Blake painstakingly applied the makeup. There was a fine line that she was trying to walk. Too little makeup and she wouldn't effectively hide the offending mark, too much and she risked drawing attention to that side of her face. Neither of those were the result she wanted. No. She wanted to find that elusive spot that rested somewhere right in the middle.

Giving one last dab to her cheek she set the bottle aside, head turning to allow her a better angle at which to criticize her efforts. She leaned closer to the reflective glass, eyes narrowing as she continued her inspection. She had succeeded in hiding the bruise with only a thin outline of makeup being visible. Not bad, she pulled back satisfied with the results.

That satisfaction lasted all of three-seconds as another thought occurred to her, its not me it has to fool though.

She knew that the presence of the bruise would be weighing heavily on Yang's mind all night, but she hoped that maybe, just maybe if she could hide it that it wouldn't be that bad, Out of sight, out of mind. Doubts ran rampant through her mind as she wondered if her makeup job would be enough to make Yang forget about the bruise. She checked her scroll, frown returning as she did, there was no time left for her do anything else.

It'll have to do.

Giving her hair, which she had decided to just leave down and straight, a quick flip and fluff she turned and exited the bathroom. Cutting the light off as she went. Pausing beside her bed, she grabbed her brown-leather shoulder bag. Checking to make sure that everything she would need was in fact inside the bag, she fed her arm through as she slung the strap over her head; allowing the bag to rest comfortably against her hip. She then quickly slid into the pair of two-inch black heels that she and Weiss had selected and set aside earlier.

Now fully clothed and as ready for the date as she would ever be she headed out, cutting her light off as she went. She didn't bother closing the door; she doubted Ruby and Weiss would enter her room while she and Yang were out. Even if they did they would find nothing surprising, the tighter than tight quarters of their dorms at Beacon had left very few secrets between the four girls.

Walking down the hallway she quickly found herself at the top of the stairs. The sound of her team's laughter soon reached her ears; the jovial sound added an extra kick to her step. Taking the stair's two at a time she descended down into the foyer. Once there she wasted little time in heading to the living room, where the laughter was emanating from.

She cut the corner; face instantly splitting into a smile at what was before her. Weiss was sitting on the love-seat face as red as a tomato, as a laughing and very bouncy Ruby, sat draped across her lap.

Ruby was the first to notice her, a call of; "Blake! You finally made it down!" Spilt excitedly from her lips, silver eyes scanned over her. "You look really pretty!"

"Thank you," Blake could feel her cheeks heating up at the compliment. "So, where's Yang?" She asked, hoping to change the subject and also having noticed that her date was nowhere to be seen.

The smirk that settled over Ruby's lips could only be described as mischievous. "She took a glass to the kitchen for me," Ruby said, her voice sharing in the same mischievous quality as the smirk that dominated her lips. "She should be back any second now."

As if answering her sister's cue, Yang chose that moment to reenter the room.

…And that's also when Blake felt her heart jump up into her throat.

For as long as she had known her fiery partner, even back before her feelings had developed from those of platonic friendship and into the romantic ones she currently harbored, she had found Yang beautiful. As Yang stood across the room from her now though…beautiful didn't even come close to describing her.

The blonde woman was draped in a floor-length dress whose orange color perfectly matched that of the setting sun. The dress had one sleeve; the orange-fabric fell from Yang's right shoulder all the way down to her wrist, while her left shoulder and arm were open to the air. Blake's eyes lingered upon the exposed milky-skin of Yang's collarbone for several moments before she forced them further south, following the line of the dress as it fought to cover Yang's ample bosom.

With every inch down her eyes traveled, Blake could feel her heartbeat quicken. Once past her chest the dress continued its mission of accenting every square-inch of Yang's body, perfectly, Blake absently wondered if the blonde had had the dress made specifically for her. It certainly fits her like a custom…

Going down beyond her hips the dress opened up, with slits running from thigh-high all the way down to where it touched the floor. Allowing Yang's perfectly toned legs to be on display as she walked.

Reaching the end of her journey Blake's eyes snapped back up to Yang's face, which was framed by golden curls. Amused lilac stared back at her.

"Like what you see, kitten?" Yang's smile was as bright as the sun.

"I…uh," she faltered; unaware that Yang had caught her gawking.

"I'll take that as a: yes." Yang laughed.

Blake couldn't decide if she loved the sound or if she hated it.

Yang smiled at her again, decision made. "Are you ready to go?"

"As I'll ever be." Blake answered, her heart having finally returned to its normal location and rhythm within her chest.

"Great!" Yang said as she grabbed a small red-wrist bag from the mantle. "The cab should be here soon."

"If by cab," Weiss started, reminding Blake of the presence of the red and white couple. "You mean personal limousine, you'd be correct."

"What do you mean?" Yang asked, confusion plainly written across her face.

"Well once Ruby and I returned home earlier and learned of your date I knew one of two things. One: either you were going to call a cab," Weiss counted the points off on her hand, a small smirk forming on her lips. "Or two: you were going to take that deathtrap that you call a bike."

"Hey!" Yang exclaimed. "Bumblebee is not a deathtrap!"

"Say's you," Weiss said, with a smirk that Blake found to be incredibly teasing. "Anyway, I figured that you would do one of those things and I'll be damned before I let you take that deathtrap out, let alone a public cab."

"So what did you do, princess?" Yang asked, arms crossing indignantly over her chest, her voice thick with annoyance and anger.

Blake idly wondered if she would have to prevent her date from reaming Weiss. Nobody, not even Ruby, got away with calling Yang's beloved bike a 'deathtrap' without some kind of retribution.

"What, isn't it obvious?" Weiss directed the question towards Yang, voice decidedly sweet. "I called my chauffeur to drive you tonight."

Blake had to stifle a laugh as she watched Yang's expression go from outrage to bewilderment.

"You-wha, really?" Yang stammered the words out, making Blake's war with her laughter that much harder for the Faunus to win.

"Yes, really." Weiss said a smug, satisfied look on her face. "They should be here any minute and I think you'll find the ride far more enjoyable in the limo than you would have your bike or a cab."

"I-uh," Yang's eyes moved away from Weiss and to Blake, lilac pools silently asking for help. Blake gladly answered the call.

"What I think Yang is trying to say is; thank you, Weiss." She said, quickly adding on. "It's a very lovely gesture."

Blake managed to hide her smirk as Weiss's face flushed slightly at her comment, but only just.

"Yes, well." Weiss said, clearing her throat. "You were both supportive of mine and Ruby's relationship, so it's honestly the least that I can do."

"Aww, princess! You really do care!"

"Silence you oaf!"

"Yeah," Ruby finally piqued up. "Leave Weiss alone Yang!"

Blake wasn't sure what it was, be it: the teasing tones, the smiles and smirks, or just the sight of Ruby trying to be intimidating while still sitting curled up in Weiss's lap. Maybe it was a combination of the three, hell it could have been something else entirely. Regardless of what it was there was something about the current scene before her eyes that caused her to burst out in laughter. The other girls soon followed, filling the room with a cacophony of giggles and chuckles.

As abruptly as the laughing fit had begun, it ended, leaving the four occupants of the room panting and out of breath.

"Man," Yang said, hand wiping at tears that had formed at the corner of her eyes. "That felt good!"

Blake had to whole-heartedly agree with her partner that had felt good. It had been uplifting, a boost to her spirits that she hadn't even known she needed. She tried and failed to remember the last time that she had laughed that hard. It can't have been that long ago, could it? It must have been if her normally robust memory had no record of it.

"It most certainly did." Weiss agreed.

Blake's feline ears twitched as a knock sounded from the door. The Faunus looked to her left, eyes falling onto the white-rectangular shape of the door. Butterflies fluttered in her stomach, the sound of the prim and proper knock could mean only one thing.

It was time.

"That must be Robert."

The sound of Weiss's voice pulled Blake's attention back to the living room, her eyes instantly locking with Yangs. The searing look within those purple pools was more than enough to make her breath hitch.

Yang smiled.

"Well, are you ready to go partner?"

"Yes," Blake squeaked the word out. Her voice sounding far more anxious than she wanted it to, she swore she could see Yang's smile deepen.

"Alright, let's go!" The blonde quickly padded across the room, offering her arm out to Blake, her million-watt smile never once leaving her face.

Blake happily accepted the offer, intertwining her arm around Yang's. Their hands found each other next, palms resting against one another as their fingers laced together. Together the couple turned to head towards the door. Just as they were about to open the front door and cross over the threshold, Yang stopped.

Blake turned to her partner, the question on her lips dying as soon as she saw the glint of mischief in her eyes.

"Weiss!" Yang called out, voice serious despite the teasing expression she wore. "You had better not try any funny business with my sister!"

The only response was a strangled mass of flustered phrases and words, causing the both of them to laugh as Yang lead them out the door.

As promised a limo and its driver awaited them.

The limo was what Blake had come to expect from vehicles associated with the Schnee's. The car sported a pristine white paintjob that was finished in such a way that it gave the car an almost ethereal glow, not unlike that of a Dust crystal. The Schnee family crest was embellished along the side.

The driver, Robert, Weiss had called him. Was a man who, by Blake's eye, appeared to be in his mid to late fifties. His eyes, which were the deepest shade of brown that the young Faunus had ever seen, seemed to smile as the two women approached.

"Good evening ladies," he started with a thick accent that Blake didn't recognize. "My name is Robert Clay; I will be your driver this evening."

Blake gave a courteous nod in return, catching Yang do a similar gesture in her peripheral vision. Pleasantries out of the way, Robert opened the door, holding it open for them as they entered.

Yang gestured towards the door with her free arm, "After you, kitten."

Blake quickly entered the limo, hoping that by doing so she could hide the small bush that she knew colored her cheeks at the nickname. Scooting far enough across the plush leather seat to allow room for Yang, she settled down. Her eyes turned back to the door, where she saw Yang handing a folded piece of paper to Robert.

"This is where we're going; you know how to get there?"

Robert unfolded the paper, a smile gracing his lips. "Of course, madam. And may I say, it's a fine choice."

Blake wasn't positive, the dim lighting from within the limo affecting her vision, but she was almost certain that Yang was blushing.

"Thanks," Yang said as she slipped into the car, the door closing behind her.

"So, where are we going?" Blake asked as she slid closer to Yang, basking in the natural warmth that radiated from her partner. She grabbed ahold of the hand that rested on the cushion between them, once again interlocking their fingers.

"Oh, wouldn't you like to know." Yang said her voice teasing, though Blake was pretty sure she could hear a small waver in her voice.

It almost sounds like she's nervous. The idea that her date was also a little nervous did wonder's to quell the butterflies that continued to flutter around in her stomach.

"So you aren't going to tell me?" She asked, head coming to lean against Yang's broad shoulder. She could feel Yang shake her head as the limo gracefully jerked into motion.

"Nope, you'll just have to wait and see. My lips are sealed."

She had expected such an answer, but she'd be lying if she said she wasn't a little disappointed that Yang wouldn't tell her where they were going.

She always has liked surprises…

"Fine," her eyes slid shut. Yang's sunny-warmth and comforting presence combing perfectly with the vibrations of the limo's axle through the seat, the combination lulled her into a peaceful-contentment. She felt Yang squeeze her hand; she returned the gesture a smile on her face.

"I'll wait and see."

The Emporium.

Blake didn't believe it at first, but upon rereading the giant porcelain sign with bright red letters that were embellished with bright-white-neon. There was no denying it; they were at The Emporium, one of the most prestigious restaurants that Vale had to offer.

She looked to Yang, who had just finished talking with Robert and was making her way over to join her, a smile ever present on her face. One question raged within her mind.

How?

How in the world did she manage to get us a table here?

"So, should we go in?" Yang asked as she came to stand next to her.

Blake just nodded in response, not trusting her voice to not ask the question that currently occupied her mind. She would ask Yang how she had pulled this off later, when they weren't standing out in the middle of the entryway. Accepting the hand that was offered to her, Blake allowed Yang to lead them inside, passed the grand granite columns and into what served as the restaurants foyer, glistening gold chandeliers hung low from the ceiling.

The blonde lead them up to a podium, a man – a wolf-Faunus by the looks of his ears – stood waiting patiently behind it.

"Good evening and welcome to The Emporium," He greeted, in a well-practiced tone of voice. "Do you have a reservation?"

Yang spoke her name which caused the man to return his eyes to the book that lay open before him, finger tracing along the list of names that were written in black and blue ink. He turned the page, finger reaching the halfway point before its journey ended.

"Ah, here you are Miss Xiao Long: corner-table for two." He paused, withdrawing two menus from a hidden cubby on his side of the podium. "If you'll follow me."

With that the man turned and led them deeper into the restaurants interior. Blake trailed behind Yang as she followed the attendant, the blonde's hand still gently clasping her own. She allowed her eyes to wander, trusting that Yang would prevent any unwanted collisions.

Everywhere her eyes went she could see people sitting and dining. Some exchanged idle chit-chat while others seemed content to enjoy their food in what appeared to be companionable silence. One thing that stood out though was the dress of everyone in attendance, they were most certainly amongst some of Vale's upper-class tonight.

Before Blake had enough time to actually ponder if she was underdressed, they stopped, having arrived at their destination.

"Here we are ladies," he placed the menus down, one in front of either of the two chairs. "May I interest either of you in a glass of complimentary water?"

The two girls nodded.

"Very well, your waiter will be along shortly with your drinks and to take your orders." With a bow and one final smile the Faunus man turned and left.

Blake and Yang stood momentarily motionless, before the blonde moved past Blake and to the table. Coming to a halt behind one of the chairs she pulled it out, offering it to the Faunus. "My lady."

Fighting a losing battle with a blush Blake gratefully accepted the chair, hiding her stocking covered legs under the table as she slid the chair forward. She felt the tips of Yang's fingers ghost over her shoulder as the blonde moved around from behind her, gracefully occupying the seat opposite her. When Yang's gaze finally rose up to meet hers she was greeted with teasing eyes and a smirk so confident that it was borderline obnoxious.

"Sooo," Yang drawled the single syllable out for all it was worth. "What do you think?"

"I think you've out done yourself." Blake again allowed her eyes to pander over the room. The table that they were seated at was nestled quietly in the back-corner, allowing them a higher level of privacy than was possible elsewhere. It was intimate. "I'll admit, when you asked me to dinner I never expected that we would end up here."

Yang looked like she was about to respond but was interrupted as their waiter arrived, placing two tall glasses that threatened to overflow with chilled water before them. The man quickly took their orders and left, promising to soon return with their desired foods.

After that a silence fell over the couple, one that felt all too awkward for Blake. Dating had never been her forte; as a matter of fact she could count on one hand the number of dates she had ever been on. As such she really had no idea where to begin or what to even say, sure she had read more than her fair share of romance novels but those were fiction, this was real. It was actually happening and as exhilarating as it was, it terrified her.

She heard Yang laugh.

"Adorable!"

Blake's brow knit in confusion as her date continued to giggle. "What's, 'adorable?'"

"You!" Blake wasn't sure if she should be flattered or offended, luckily for her Yang was in an explaining mood. "I can see the gears turning in your head; you're way overthinking this Blake. It's a date; it's not a test or a mission."

Yang gave another short chuckle, "You just need to relax."

"That's easy for you to say, first dates must almost be second nature to you by now." As soon as the words left her mouth, Blake gasped. Unable to believe that she had allowed the sentence to be spoken, she instantly began to formulate an apology. Only to, once again, have her ears met with the heavenly sound of Yang's laugh.

"You're right," The blonde started, "I definitely have more experience than you do."

Blake couldn't believe her eyes or ears; Yang was laughing and smiling at a statement that most anyone else would have taken offense to. This is Yang though, her thoughts reminded her, she most certainly isn't 'anyone else.' The thoughts served to settle some of her nerves, though what happened next took her by complete surprise.

Yang's eyes and expression, both, dropped their teasing and confident façade, trading it out for one that was far more sincere and prudent. "Though, I don't think I've ever had one as important as tonight."

The sound of Yang's voice as she spoke those words caused Blake's heart to flutter. In the four years that she had known her partner she had never heard her sound that vulnerable. She swallowed around the lump that had formed in her throat. "So, I take it I'm not the only one that's nervous then?"

"Oh no, you should have seen me when I was getting ready," Yang shook her head, a tiny smile playing at her lips. "If it wasn't for Ruby I don't think I ever would have left the room."

Blake took a sip of her water, an attempt to stall the conversation in order for her to come up with something else to say. If her heart also decided it wanted to stop beating like the wings on a humming-bird that would also be nice, though she doubted that that would happen anytime soon this evening. Finally her brain decided on a topic, placing the chilled glass back down she looked up, finding that Yang's eyes were already on her. She had to fight to keep from squirming.

"So, I take it from what you said that Ruby helped you pick out what to wear tonight?"

"Yup," Yang said, pausing to also take a drink from her own glass of water. "Rubes has always been somewhat of a springboard for me."

Blake smiled at the affectionate nickname that the blonde had for her sister, "Well remind me to thank her." She took a deep breath, "You look really beautiful tonight Yang."

"Nowhere near as beautiful as you are though."

How?

How did Yang always find a way to turn her compliments around, make her blush? She certainly had no idea and she wished that she did, if only to even the playing field between them. Luckily enough for Blake their waiter chose that exact moment to return, placing their plates down directly in front of them. Allowing for the conversation to fall to the wayside as they both dived into their meals.

Silence reigned as they ate. Blake enjoying her fish fillet, the pink and tender meat hit just the right spot in the Faunus's stomach, causing a small purr to rise from her chest. Yang to, seemed to be enjoying her meal, if the soft-satisfied sighs that were reaching Blake's ears were anything to go by.

As they continued to eat, Blake started trying to think up some topic for discussion. While she enjoyed the companionable silence that had fallen over the two of them, they would eventually need to resume some form of conversation, and this time Blake planned to be the one that came out on top.

"So," She paused mid thought, looking up to see Yang dabbing at some steak sauce that was at the corner of her mouth with the cloth napkins that they had been provided. "When did you realize that you were interested in me?"

She couldn't prove it, but she swore there were times that Yang could read her mind. How else could she explain what had just transpired? Being sure to remind herself to ask Yang how she did that later she turned her attention to the question at hand.

"I'm not exactly sure when it happened," Blake explained as she took a drink of water to wash her last bite of food down. "I went to bed one night with you on my mind and when I woke up the next morning I don't know…something just clicked."

She shrugged, she knew it wasn't the most romantic answer in the world but it was the truth. She had woken up one morning with an almost uncanny desire to see Yang and upon fulfilling that desire, her heart had fluttered. From there it had taken the young Faunus exactly two days to realize just exactly why that had happened. She had fallen for her partner and fallen hard.

At the time this revelation had been something that she had no idea how to deal with. For one she had never felt that way towards another girl before, and if that wasn't difficult and confusing enough, Yang had been right in the middle of one of her more "serious" relationships at the time. Given all of that she had decided to do what she had always done, what she did best, bottle it all up and ignore it. That had worked, until their graduation night, until Yang had kissed her.

She smiled at the memory.

"So," Yang's voice tore her away from her thoughts. "I guess that would make me your first girl then?"

Blake nodded, "What about you?"

"I've dated a couple before you, never anything serious. Or what qualifies as serious to me."

Blake hummed, she knew before asking the question that Yang held no real preference as to what gender she dated. As far as she knew Yang didn't have a discriminatory bone in her body, which was one of the many things that she loved about the brawler. "So what about you then, how long have you…"

"Three years-six months." Yang rattled off.

Blake choked on her drink, "You've…" She coughed, desperately trying to clear her airway. "That long and you never said anything?"

"Neither did you," Yang shrugged, "And the last thing that I wanted to do was make things awkward between the two of us, so I just let things be."

"So that night on the roof…" Blake allowed the question to go unfinished.

Yang smiled, appearing slightly sheepish, "Like I said that night, I just really needed to kiss you at least once." Her expression turned somber then, "I figured that that was my last chance…and I just needed you to know…"

Blake reached across the table, her hand grabbing ahold of Yang's own. She squeezed it, waiting for Yang to look at her. As soon as lilac met her eyes she began, being sure to keep her voice soft and low.

"I'm really glad that you did that." Her voice caught then, the emotions from that night crashing into her like a tidal wave during a monsoon. The doubts, the fears, all of it, came flooding back. She felt Yang give their conjoined hands a squeeze; the action grounded her, giving her the clarity she needed to continue. "I don't know what I would have done had you not.

"Like I've told you, I went up there because I was afraid. So much was changing, everything was changing." She took a shuddering breath, blinking back tears. "Out of it all though I…I was most afraid that I wouldn't see Ruby, Weiss, or you ever again…so when you kissed me it gave me…hope."

Blake dropped her eyes down to the table, finding herself unable to keep her gaze locked with Yang's any longer. She hadn't said it, at least not directly, but she had just bared her heart to Yang. Something that she was sure didn't go unnoticed by the blonde; Yang had always had an uncanny ability to read her.

"Hey," She felt a tug on her hand, causing her to bring her eyes back up. Watery purple stared back at her. "Me too."

The tears she had been holding back poured forth at the words. They had been whispered, but the adoration and love that was behind them were as clear as the smile that was currently on Yang's face…

"May I interest either of you in desert?"

Blake flinched, pulling her hand away from Yang's as she did so. How did I not hear him coming? Her ears flicked in rabid annoyance as she glared up at their waiter, all the while wishing that she had Weiss's ability to dismiss people by merely looking at them. She made another mental note to ask the heiress just exactly how she managed that trick later.

"I'm fine thanks," Yang said, her attention then turning to Blake. "What about you, want anything?"

"No thank you." She continued to glare at the man as she declined the offer. She knew that he was just doing his job, but he had shattered a moment that the Faunus had been immensely enjoying – despite her blush – and for that, he had earned the full extent of her ire.

Yang must have sensed her growing annoyance as she quickly asked if the man could bring the check over.

She continued to stare after him, eyes doing her best to bore a hole through his back. Finally he vanished around a corner that led to, what Blake assumed, was an employee only section of the restaurant.

Unable to continue her attempt at making the poor waiter disappear off the face of Remnant, she returned her attention back to her table, finding that Yang was staring at her with barely contained laughter.

"What?" She snapped at her date, causing the blonde to let loose a laugh.

"Nothing, it's just that you looked like you were about kill our waiter with your knife."

"I was heavily considering it." Yang laughed again, forcing Blake's lips to form a small smile. "He's lucky that you sent him away when you did."

"I'm sure."

She met Yang's gaze then, a small joyful lopsided-smile adorned her face. If a picture was worth a thousand words, Yang's smile then, was worth well over ten times that amount. But nothing, not even her smile, could compare to her eyes. Those swirling pools of amethyst - that were speckled with the tiniest amount of silver - held such beauty and conveyed so many different emotions, that Blake didn't know which held her interest more. The splendor or the depth.

Something that she didn't recognize flashed behind Yang's eyes, whatever it was, it sent a shiver up and down her spine. She was just about to say something, when…

"Here's your check."

Blake sighed as she exited the limo, a laughing Yang following closely behind.

"I swear the look on your face…" Yang burst into another fit of laughter, something she had been doing since they had left The Emporium. "I wish I had a picture of it, Ruby would have gotten a kick out of it."

"Yes, I know." Blake's ears drooped, embarrassment coursing through her veins. "You've said as much at least twenty times…"

The limo pulled away, the sound of the tires rubbing over the pavement serving as a buffer against Yang's raucous laughter. Blake turned away from the sound, feet carrying her up the stoop and to the door. She was just about to open it and enter the house when Yang caught her, gentle hands grabbing ahold and turning her back around.

"Hey," Yang murmured, worry filling her voice. "You know that I'm just teasing you right?"

"I know," She nodded as she angled her face up, eyes instantly seeking out Yang's own. "I just…" She stalled, looking away again.

"'Just,' what?" Yang whispered.

Blake tried to pull away, but with the door at her back and Yang directly in front of her, there was nowhere for her to go.

"I wanted tonight to be…special," Blake was cutoff as Yang laughed.

Shock, hurt, and confusion, all three ran through her at the action. Laughing? Why is she laughing?

"Oh, that's rich," Yang said as her laughter died off into giggles. "You think tonight was ruined because you got a little flustered at the waiter?"

Blake just stared up at Yang, confusion becoming her most dominant emotion as the blonde smiled at her.

"Your too adorable for your own good, do you know that?" Yang shook her head, "Let me tell you what tonight was for me."

Blake blinked as Yang brought her hands up, one resting against the nape of her neck while the other cupped her unbruised cheek. Warmth spread through her at the contact, her breathing hitched.

"Tonight was the night that I went out to dinner with my girlfriend. Someone who is so intelligent, kind, and beautiful, that I still question if this is all one big dream. I mean why would she settle for me? Why? After everything that I've done…"

The hand that was at her neck moved then, coming up to allow a thumb too gently rub at the makeup that Blake had labored over hours before hand. The Faunus leaned into the touch, the small tings of pain being far outweighed at the pleasure of feeling Yang's touch.

"When you first came down earlier I almost did a double take." Blake could hear the hitch in Yang's voice.

"I…I wanted to take your mind off it." She swallowed the lump that had formed in her own throat. "I knew that if you could see it, it would be all that you could think about."

"You have no idea what that means to me. That you care enough to do something like that…for me"

She looked deeply into Yang's eyes, eyes that were glistening with unshed tears.

"You…" She licked her dry lips, face heating up. "You could show…"

She never got to finish that sentence as a pair of soft-warm lips claimed her own. Her eyelids fluttered shut as she allowed herself to become lost in the feeling of the kiss. Her hands wandered, becoming lost within the mass of golden curls that made up Yang's mane. Hair as smooth and soft as silk glided through her calloused fingertips like water. She drew her tongue across Yang's bottom lip, asking for permission. A fire ignited in her heart as Yang opened her mouth, allowing the Faunus to deepen the kiss. She could feel Yang moan before the sound ever reached her ears, the vibrations coursing through where their lips touched.

Eventually the burning sensation within her moved from her heart and into her lungs, forcing her to reluctantly pull away from the kiss. She panted as she opened her eyes; a happy-content smile gracing her lips. "That was…amazing."

"Yeah," Yang agreed, clearly out of breath.

Blake's smile grew as Yang pulled her in close for a hug, a chin came to rest in-between her cat-ears.

"Thank you, Blake." She pulled Yang closer, burying her face deep against the crook of the blonde's neck. As she murmured, "For everything."

AN: So, give it to me honest, how'd I do?

This chapter was difficult to write for a myriad of different reasons. One being that I don't have very much dating experience myself, the other most predominate issue was trying to make the dialogue not come across as clichéd tripe…which it still totally is, but hopefully it's not cringe worthy.

Anyways.

As always I hoped that you enjoyed. If you did let me know why and what you enjoyed and if you hated it let me know what you disliked.

And I also hope you are looking forward to next time… Which by the way, you better get ready; the rabbit hole is coming…