



An addition to the Analysis of the Garrott



To All



As far as I know, no one has actually challenged what I allege to be proof of the amateurism at the garrote scene. Still, there are those (mostly on other forums) who continue to express or imply that the knots are "complicated," "sophisticated" and "professional." The inference is that no "ordinary folk" are capable of creating this scene. The further inference is that the Ramseys are incapable of this, therefore innocent. If you will bear with on what promises to be a rather long winded analysis, I will try again to lay this "professional" nonsense to rest.



Every scene, crime scene or otherwise, is usually made up of several elements. Being knowledgeable in one or some does not assure being knowledgeable in all. For instance, I am quite knowledgeable about ropes, knots and that sort of thing, but if the area of investigation were about computers, setting up web pages and that sort of thing, I would probably take a back seat to at least 90% of the posters. Forgetting this fact of specific knowledge often leads to the acceptance of "expert opinion" that is in error.



Autopsy report:



"Wrapped around the neck with a double knot in the midline of the posterior neck is a length of white cord similar to that described as being tied around the right wrist. This ligature cord is cut on the right side of the neck and removed. A single black ink mark is placed on the left side of the cut and a double black ink mark on the right side of the cut. The posterior knot is left intact. Extending from the knot on the posterior aspect of the neck are two tails of the knot, one measuring 4 inches in length and having a frayed end, and the other measuring 17 inches in length with the end tied in multiple loops around a length of a round tan-brown wooden stick which measures 4.5 inches in length."



I certainly am not equipped to question Dr. Meyer's medical know how, but he is obviously very unknowledgeable about ropes and knots. The mental picture I got from Dr. Meyers description is far different than the mental picture I get from observing the relevant photos. His description is horribly erroneous.



There is no double knot in this scene, hence no two leads leading away from a double knot. A double knot by definition is two knotting throws. It does not exist here. There is a single knot preceded by two or three turns of the cord around itself, but only one knotting action. The short lead does trail from the knot. The long part to the handle is simply the distance from the small loop to the handle. It is a continuation away from the loop around the neck and is not connected to nor interrupted by any knot.



We shall later look more at the flaws here, but first, let's establish something of a background of realistic professional to use as a reference.



If you have ever seen a calf roping\tying contest in person or on tv, you may have noticed the contestant shaking out the lasso just prior to start. The shaking out it to get the lasso dimensions suitable to the task out hand. This shaking out is possible because the small loop at the end of the rope allows free travel of the main line for the adjustment of size. This small loop is fixed by design so that it will not slip and change size, thus compressing upon the main line and reducing free movement.



Without this fixed small loop and with compression, upon every use, the contestant could not shake out the lasso, but would have to use both hands and considerable time to back off the compressed small loop in order to put the lasso back to the dimensions wanted. Ergo, a small loop that is not fixed and will compress is very unprofessional. This is all basic understanding in the construction and use of a lasso by whatever name and whatever application.



In none of these contests will you ever see a contestant throw a rope over the calf's neck and then construct the lasso. Yes, the image is quite ridiculous. It is just as ridiculous elsewhere, but perhaps not a noticeable to most. By the wildest stretch of imagination, I cannot think of a single instance in which construction of a lasso on the object makes any "professional" sense. It appears that in such a circumstance, the lasso element is more accidental than intended; or the construction was not for use, but for show.



I get the impression that most of you are not all that familiar with garrotes, ropes, knots and that sort of thing. Good. If you will visually go along with me, you can help me make the point that what is found at the crime scene is not professional, but an amateur following intuitive prompts. By intuitive prompts, I mean letting the circumstance dictate the next move as opposed to a knowing operation.



Lets' assume that staging is called for. For various reasons, some options are rejected. The idea settled on is garroting. Your knowledge of garrotes and garroting is limited to knowing it has something to do with strangulation with a rope or something and involves a handle.



You have in your possession a nylon cord about four or five feet long. A paint brush will provide the handle. You start from the basic of straddling the face down victim for comfort of operation. It is noticed that the arms are in the way. They are moved to an overhead position to get them out of the way.



The next move is to take one end of the cord and run it under the throat and around the neck. You see that the circuit must be completed to effect a loop for strangulation. Obviously, this means connecting the cord to itself in something of a circle. This can be done in several ways, but let's look at it from the viewpoint of what is shown in the photo.



You are holding the long part of the cord in your left hand. The shorter part that has been brought around the neck is in your right hand. (Although its all one cord, the long cord refers to the part in the left hand and the short cord refers to the part in the right hand which has traveled around the neck.) You need to make some kind of connection of the short cord to the long cord. Visual dictates the short cord in your right hand over and under (or vise versa) the long cord in your left hand. (Where else could you go other than tying a single or double knot like a shoe string tie, and this would slip?)



You can't just drop it here as it would just fall apart and not create a stable noose. What's next? You need to anchor the completed circuit in some way. How? You need some kind of knotting and holding action. What is the most obvious means? The short cord which has been looped around the long cord is wrapped around itself. What now? There is an opening at the point where the short cord is looped around the long cord. The end of the short cord is put through this opening to create the knotting action. End of story. Real complicated, huh?



The photos shows the short cord wrapped around itself two or three times before the end is passed through the opening and the single knot created. Why two or three times? Amateur again. There is no advantage here any more than there is in the many turns around the handle. In fact, is also detrimental as it creates a bit of a back pressure that tends ever so slightly to undo the single knot.



Complicated? Professional? Hardly. Following the intuitively "obvious" is precisely what resulted in the many flaws. As further illustration, let's correct just one of the flaws.



The finished product in the photo shows the short cord traveling on the left side of the neck in a clockwise direction. It is compressed against the main cord. This means an action to reduce the size of the loop for strangulation would tend to back out the short lead and undo the knot.



Let's go back to the point where the short cord is looped around the long to create the noose. Now we want to anchor it. Let go of the long cord in your left hand and grasp the short cord near where if comes over the long cord. Now take the end of the short cord and run it under the cord across the back of the neck. Bring the end up to your left hand and over where you are holding. Now bring the end through the loop created by this action. This creates a knot that is not affected by the motion of the garrote. A bit more complicated? Sure, but that's what it takes for efficiency. That's the point.



Even thought this design still has the flaw of slipping and compressing the cord restricting travel, it will hold no matter what. The short lead is now going counterclockwise around the neck. Again, this is elementary stuff to any and all with even minimal experience in this area.



What I'm trying to do here is the same as the original analysis. I am trying eliminate all the nonsense about "professional" and see what kind of theory John Ramsey or Lou Smit can come up with without the illusion of "professional."



Needless to say, I am available to respond to any and all questions regarding my analysis. No one is excluded. Ramsey, Smit, "believers", "just curious", or a hundred attorneys. Its all the same to me. delmar@ct.net Copyright at Common Law, Delmar England, 2000. All Rights Reserved.