I'll say "Google it". That's all. RT @LeopoldTheBrave Someone made this and it's making people angry. pic.twitter.com/yVXUAPXYea — Katsuhiro Harada (@Harada_TEKKEN) March 2, 2015

hayaki14: Hearing you say that (go Google the answer) has allowed me to hold out a little more hope, Harada-san.



Harada: Well, it looks like you've already decided on your own interpretation of what I said, but regardless of whether or not Jin is dead or alive, Tekken 7 is a proper sequel in every way. And as you can see, (in Tekken 7) even with Azazel sealed away, the Devil Gene still exists, right?



hayaki14: Wait, but wasn't it because of Azazel that the Devil Blood got sealed?



Harada: Even if it is sealed, in the current version of the game you can clearly see that Kazuya still has it stored within his body. And in fact, he has gotten the Devil ability under his control, ready to activate it at any time. Thanks to Azazel getting sealed, all sorts of great calamities have been prevented, but even so the Devil ability within Kazuya did not go away.



MUSOUsGAME: So we can take that to mean that Jin is still alive, right?



Harada: I've already explained earlier that none of this discussion (Azazel and the Devil Gene) has anything to do with whether or not Jin is dead or alive. I don't understand how you could interpret what I said to mean that. It's not a matter of what is being said here, but rather how you're choosing to comprehend it. I didn't actually talk about whether or not Jin is dead or alive.



MUSOUsGAME: So at the very least we should be able to take it as Jin Kazama is alive even in the current timeline, right?



Harada: Are my words even getting through to you?



MUSOUsGAME: Can we believe it to be so? We can, right?



Harada: Like I said, are my words getting through?



MUSOUsGAME: Yes, they're getting through to me just fine. But even so, even in the past I've been quite anxious about whether or not Jin Kazama would make it into Tekken 7 for a while now. So can we please get a proper answer to that?



Harada: Are there any developers out there who would spill the beans on everything that's been asked to them? Okay, why don't you give it a shot: go over to Ono and try asking him when Street Fighter 5 is coming out. Because I'm worried for them.



...As I was tweeting that I suddenly thought of something I'd like to ask. Maybe if it's Ono he might actually be able to answer. Alright then, I shall give Ono a call later, and persistently ask him about when Deep Down's release date is.



