Update 11:25 a.m. Sunday: Those claiming to be demonstrators on social media say they will gather at 2 p.m. Sunday at Portland International Airport to continue protesting President Trump's ban. Social media reports include a Facebook events page.

Update 8:45 a.m. Sunday: A Port of Portland spokesman, Steve Johnson, said port officials are unaware of any passengers who were detained at Portland International Airport Saturday as part of the president's executive order.

Dozens of demonstrators marched Saturday afternoon in and around the main terminal at Portland International Airport to protest President Donald Trump's order barring all refugees from entering the United States for four months.

They chanted: "Say it loud, say it clear, refugees are welcome here" and "No ban, no wall, America is for us all." Many carried signs, some read: "Detain Trump," "Don't Normalize Hate" and "Let them in."

Lucia Martinez organized the march a few hours before after hearing from friends in New York that people were being detained at airports across the country. She sent out a tweet about the march on Saturday afternoon.

The protest briefly shut down the MAX line to the airport, but TriMet said it was running again with delays.

We are broadcasting live from PDX where approximately 50 people are demonstrating in support of immigrants. Posted by The Oregonian on Saturday, January 28, 2017

All operations at the airport are normal, Port of Portland spokesman Steve Johnson said Saturday evening.

Several police officers watched the peaceful demonstration but didn't intervene as people marched down stairs and by ticket gates inside and on sidewalks by cars dropping off and picking up travelers outside. The protest began with about two dozen people but swelled to around 100 at one point.

As they marched, several travelers at the airport joined them, marching alongside the crowd with their suitcases in tow, Martinez said.

On her way home, she ran into a man who was an immigrant from Iraq, she said. He said his friend, also an Iraq native, went to visit Saudi Arabia. Now, he told her, he was afraid he might not see him again.

"It's precisely for people like that that we speak up," Martinez said. "So they don't give up hope and they know they are wanted here."

Trump's order immediately suspended a program that last year resettled to the U.S. roughly 85,000 people displaced by war, political oppression, hunger and religious prejudice.

He indefinitely blocked all those fleeing Syria, where a civil war has displaced millions of people, and imposed a 90-day ban on entry to the U.S. from seven Muslim majority nations: Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria and Yemen.

Thousands of protesters also converged at John F. Kennedy Airport in New York where 12 refugees were detained Saturday under the order.

Later Saturday evening, a federal judge blocked deportations nationwide of those detained on entry to the country.

-- Mike Zacchino and Samantha Matsumoto of The Oregonian/OregonLive and wire reports