13 SHARES Facebook Twitter Google Reddit Tumblr Digg Linkedin Stumbleupon Mail Print

Over the last few weeks, the events this fall have shown on what side of history the security apparatus of the United States stands. While one hand will jump on its international soapbox and praise the virtue of civil rights loudly, the other hand savagely represses even the most basic freedoms. The cold and swift press crackdown in NYC during the OWS raids was only a recent and highly publicized event, in a sea of similar incursions. It would seem, to the casual observer that the Constitution is only invoked in cases that favor the state, and is all but forgotten otherwise. Henceforth, the casual observer would not be wrong if he assumed that document to be as dead as dead could be.

The security forces have undergone a slow transformation from a community orientated force of protection according to the ideals of a social contract, to the armed force of the higher powers. It does not take much to draw the lines between corporate money and the people that “control” the actions of the police, the state. Obviously the state has much to gain by keeping the status quo, and is using the police forces of various cities to suppress the Occupy movement in it’s whole. This is illustrated best when campers in line for the newest Twilight book can construct elaborate tent cities on public land, but campers in line for free speech and direct democracy are shot, gassed, Db’d, attacked, arrested and injured.

Thus, for one to suggest a “reform of the police” without taking into account the framework that controls the police, is pointless. Are police needed? I think so, but in a way to allow full transparency and accountability to the communities they served, under the laws that community has issued, and being a voluntarily society. The police of today use violence to enforce laws voted on only by the powers on high, and often these “crimes” are punitive, victimless, or in most cases, both. As was proved in Nuremberg and as will be proved later here in this country I believe, simply “following orders” will not be a defense to your crimes against your communities.

So, I ask you, when you see a “friendly cop” please, don’t wave.

– Joey

13 SHARES Facebook Twitter Google Reddit Tumblr Digg Linkedin Stumbleupon Mail Print

EPN