Luis Enrique has reiterated that he wants Pedro to stay at Barcelona but said the decision will be solely down to the player.

Pedro, 28, has been strongly linked with Manchester United and AS has reported that negotiations for the Spain international began on Monday.

While there have been conflicting claims as to whether Pedro's contract contains a clause permitting him to leave for €30 million, it has been widely reported that the Spain international would be allowed to move on if Barca received a bid of that value.

United boss Louis van Gaal has given a strong indication that he wants to sign Pedro, and the forward's mother is said to have told reporters that he is set to leave the Camp Nou for England, but Luis Enrique told a news conference on Tuesday that he would like to keep him if possible.

"Pedro is a world-class player," he said in quotes reported by Marca. "He's shown how good he is for both club and country. Speaking as a coach, I want him to stay. Nothing has changed. Any changes will be dictated by him."

Pedro is expected to join Manchester United this summer.

With Barca unable to register any new signings until January, Pedro's departure could leave the club short of options if they were to suffer injuries or suspensions in attack.

However, the Barca coach said: "I don't like looking at 'what ifs,' especially when they're on a negative note. I prefer to think that things will carry on as usual.

"We're ready to deal with any situation that may arise during the coming season."

He added: "There will be no new signings and players will only leave if they wish to go."

Javier Mascherano has also been linked with a move away from Barca, with Tuttosport reporting that Juventus are keen on the Argentina international and that the player himself is keen on a move to Italy.

However, Mascherano remains a key figure at the Camp Nou and has just been elected Barca's fourth captain by his teammates.

"There are other players who could captain the side, but he was chosen by the players and that's how I like it," Luis Enrique said. "There are other players who, without being captains, have a voice inside the dressing room."