Two-Fisted Action & Adventure Against The Mythos

Calling All Heroes! It’s Time To Take The Fight to Cthulhu!



Pulp Cthulhu is a game of two-fisted adventure, weird science, dark deeds, and brave heroes. With this book, some roleplaying dice, and the Call of Cthulhu Rulebook, you have everything you need to adventure and explore games set in the pulp genre.

Tired of your investigators dying in quick succession when jaunting around the world in a desperate bid to save humanity? Wishing that sometimes your investigator could make a stand instead of hiding and waiting for the eldritch horror to pass? Pulp Cthulhu ups the ante and provides you with tougher, more capable heroes—ready to take on the villainous machinations of the Cthulhu Mythos!



Here you will find an adapted character generation system, rules for psychic powers, sanity, augmented skills, and weird science, as well as tips for Keepers on developing and running pulp-style games. Also, you will find information on “the Pulps” themselves and the 1930s era when America was in the grip of the Great Depression and on the road to World War II. A collection of pulp villains and monsters, and a range of pulp organizations provide the Keeper with a firm basis for running pulp style scenarios and campaigns. Four action-packed scenarios round out the book, getting your Pulp Cthulhu games started with a bang.



The guidance in this book means that you can apply the Pulp Cthulhu rules to any setting and time period, enabling Keepers to bring the flavor and action of pulp to the classic 1920s or modern-day eras, as well as anywhere else they see fit.



A Time For Heroes And A Time For Adventure!

What the Critics Say

"Pulp Cthulhu turns up the action and the threat to turn Lovecraftian investigative horror into Lovecraftian heroic horror."—Reviews from Rl’yeh.

Runner-up, Best Artwork and Presentation—Golden Geek Awards 2016.

"If you play Call of Cthulhu, do you need this supplement? ...if you want to play with a rule set deliberately intended to help your characters kick some ass, you'll probably have a lot of fun with Pulp Cthulhu."—H.P. Lovecraft Historical Society.

"Pulp Cthulhu is one of those products that could very easily have been done wrong. It’s a genre full of easy cop-outs and shortcuts, but Chaosium stuck to their guns and delivered on all fronts… You might be able to confront the creatures of the mythos to some extent, but Pulp Cthulhu only promises that you can go down swinging rather than screaming and that’s not a bad thing."—Jay Anyong, The Philippine Gamer

"I love the classic, cerebral, investigative feeling of Call of Cthulhu. I have to admit however that many times I wanted my Investigators to, basically, kick some serious ass... Pulp Cthulhu is here for that ass-kicking!"—Antonios S. Review, RPGNet.

"It’s a beautiful book, brimming with content and ideas. A worthy purchase for any Keeper, even if Pulp isn't to your taste. "—Total Party Kill.

"I love the Pulp Cthulhu idea. Having pulp heroes fight evil cult organizations can be tons of fun… The production quality deserve(s) praise. The binding, illustrations, artwork, handouts are exceptional. The books are super-high quality and even come with a red ribbon bookmark bound into the text. Chaosium did not skimp on any aspect of production..."—GrogHeads.

Download the character sheet PDFs here.

Why just buy the PDF when you get it included with the printed copy? Physical Product Name: Pulp Cthulhu

Physical Book URL: /pulp-cthulhu-hardcover/ Purchasers of physical books get the PDFs for free. If you add the book to your cart, you can add the PDF for this book to your shopping cart after you add the physical book in order to receive your FREE PDF. Please check your shopping cart for a link to the PDF before you begin the check out process.