Ubisoft couldn’t have found a better way to conclude their 3oth anniversary giveaway than this: The company has decided to offer Assassin’s Creed 3 absolutely free for the entire month. This makes the title its final gift to loyal gamers after their year-long series of giveaways launched this summer in honor of its 30th birthday.

Assassin’s Creed, being the biggest franchise of Ubisoft, makes the giveaway pretty generous. Although it is certainly not the first decent gimmick by the company, over the past few months, Splinter Cell, Beyond Good and Evil, and Far Cry have also been offered as freebies. With Assassin’s Creed 3, they have saved the best for last.

Revealed at E3 2006, Assassin’s Creed puts the audience in the middle of an ancient war between two age-old factions: the Assassins, who fight to protect freedom and the Templars, who aspire to impose a New World Order,” Ubisoft said. “From Italian Renaissance to the Russian Revolution, the player meets real historical heroes, takes part in events and shapes its own destiny. From one episode to the other, the creative teams have constantly added new layers of interaction and new gameplay making each world deeper and more fascinating.

Assassin’s Creed 3 will be available as a free download for Ubisoft Club members starting December 7. As expected, players will need a registered Uplay account to get their hands on their very own copy. The previous giveaway title, Far Cry: Blood Dragon, is still available to those who haven’t signed up yet.

PC gamers can experience the truth behind the most grisly war in history: the American Revolution. What makes this 2012 title so special is that it’s a sequel not just to Assassin’s Creed 2, but to Assassin’s Creed: Revelations. The most prominent change from the previous Assassin’s Creed games is the introduction of star Desmond Miles.

Assassin’s Creed The Ezio Collection is a compilation of the Ezio trilogy by Ubisoft released this fall. The game is out now on PlayStation 4 and Xbox One and contains some impressive improvements compared to Assassin’s Creed 2.

RELATED STORIES YOU NEED TO CHECK OUT: