Authorities report that a Dallas Center man faces 13 charges in connection with a sex abuse investigation. The Dallas County Sheriff’s Office said Randy Johnson was arrested Wednesday in connection with a sex abuse investigation that began in December 2016. Johnson is charged with three counts of indecent contact with a child, two counts of indecent exposure, four counts of third-degree sex abuse, one count of lascivious acts with a child, two counts of assault with intent to commit sex abuse and one count of child endangerment. Johnson and his wife are pastors of the Church of the Brethren in Dallas Center and live next door to the church. “They are the nicest people ever,” neighbor Sabrina Vancleve said. “Yeah, this is a complete shock.” Vancleve lives across the street from the Church of the Brethren and said she has known Johnson for years. She said news of Johnson’s arrest was the last thing she ever expected to hear. “They're well known around here,” Vancleve. “They're the nicest people. If you need something they would help out.” Christy Stout lives across the street from the Johnson family. She said Johnson’s arrest hit close to home. “I don't know what to say to that. I really don't,” Stout said. “Yeah, I'm shocked. My daughter spent the night over there quite a few times.” Neighbors said they never saw any sign of trouble, but they are concerned for his family and for their own families. “Yeah, I won't be going over there asking for help anymore,” Vancleve said. KCCI spoke to a young man who answered the door at the Johnson house Wednesday afternoon. He did not want to answer any questions. Johnson is being held at Dallas County Jail without bond.

Authorities report that a Dallas Center man faces 13 charges in connection with a sex abuse investigation.

The Dallas County Sheriff’s Office said Randy Johnson was arrested Wednesday in connection with a sex abuse investigation that began in December 2016.

Advertisement

Johnson is charged with three counts of indecent contact with a child, two counts of indecent exposure, four counts of third-degree sex abuse, one count of lascivious acts with a child, two counts of assault with intent to commit sex abuse and one count of child endangerment.

Johnson and his wife are pastors of the Church of the Brethren in Dallas Center and live next door to the church.

“They are the nicest people ever,” neighbor Sabrina Vancleve said. “Yeah, this is a complete shock.”

Vancleve lives across the street from the Church of the Brethren and said she has known Johnson for years. She said news of Johnson’s arrest was the last thing she ever expected to hear.

“They're well known around here,” Vancleve. “They're the nicest people. If you need something they would help out.”

Christy Stout lives across the street from the Johnson family. She said Johnson’s arrest hit close to home.

“I don't know what to say to that. I really don't,” Stout said. “Yeah, I'm shocked. My daughter spent the night over there quite a few times.”

Neighbors said they never saw any sign of trouble, but they are concerned for his family and for their own families.

“Yeah, I won't be going over there asking for help anymore,” Vancleve said.

KCCI spoke to a young man who answered the door at the Johnson house Wednesday afternoon. He did not want to answer any questions.

Johnson is being held at Dallas County Jail without bond.

AlertMe