ONE: Kingdom of Champions will take place next Friday at the Impact Arena in Bangkok and will feature two title fights with Thailand’s Dejdamrong Sor Amnuaysirichoke defending his strawweight title against Yoshitaka Naito in the main event.

On the undercard, one of ONE Championship's most promising up and coming stars will take to the cage for the fifth time in as many months when featherweight Christian Lee takes on Rocky Batolbatol. Lee is currently 17 years old and since his debut in December, he's already managed to pick up four wins all of which he has won inside the first round.

Having competed earlier on in the month at ONE: Ascent To Power on 6 May, Lee will step into the cage for his next fight just 21 days later at ONE: Kingdom Of Champions. He explained to the Independent why the event was one he simply didn't want to miss out on.

Join Independent Minds For exclusive articles, events and an advertising-free read for just £5.99 €6.99 $9.99 a month Get the best of The Independent With an Independent Minds subscription for just £5.99 €6.99 $9.99 a month Get the best of The Independent Without the ads – for just £5.99 €6.99 $9.99 a month

"This event is going to be huge and by far one of the biggest events of ONE Championship history," said Lee excitedly. "I think whether you are a fan of rock music or a fan of MMA fighting, you are going to come in there and see an amazing show. If I wasn't fighting, I'd just go in there and watch the fights and the music and take in the atmosphere. I think it's going to be amazing and I expect it to be one of the best fight cards yet."

When Lee spoke about rock music, he was referring to the fact that the show will feature appearances by two of Thailand’s biggest rock bands, Bodyslam and Big Ass. The inspiration behind the blend of rock music and MMA is said to be masterminded by the ONE Championship president in Thailand Kamol ‘Sukie’ Sukosol Clapp.

'Sukie' is a beloved local Thai celebrity and has a highly successful background within the music industry and he once described ONE Championship events as "having the atmosphere of a rock concert, building momentum from when the show starts, up to an epic finale manifested in an intense main event that electrifies ravenous martial arts fans."

ONE: Kingdom Of Champions has the making to be exactly that but for Christian Lee, he maintains his focus is on doing his job inside the cage as he continues to work his way up the ranks in ONE Championship's featherweight division.

"As soon as I found out I was fighting Rocky I immediately pulled up tapes of his last fights," said Lee. "I looked at his record and his past fights and I thought he was actually pretty similar to my last opponent. He swings for the fences and he goes out on his shield. He will come looking to knock me out so I'm going to be ready and I'm going to be on top of my game and look to finish him."

At just 17 years of age, Lee is living every bit the dream of any young man achieving success, fame and wealth but that doesn't stop him doing some of the most normal things a guy his age does and that includes graduating from high school.

"It's always kind of weird for me coming back home because I would be travelling the world fighting and I'd meet all these people and I'd be like 'oh I'm still actually in high school'," said Lee laughing. "Now that I've just graduated though I feel really good, nothing has really changed, I'm still doing what I've basically been doing for the past year so far.

"When I was in school I'd basically just ask for all the work ahead for the whole quarter and then when I'd go to fight, all my work would be done so that's how I've pulled it off."

With high school now in the bag, Lee will now be dedicating himself full time to MMA and that's a scary prospect for the rest of the ONE Championship featherweight division. His next stop will be ONE: Kingdom Of Champions and by the sounds of it, he's ready to rock in Bangkok.

ONE: Kingdom Of Champions Full Card - Impact Arena, Bangkok, Thailand

D. Sor Amnuaysirichoke vs. Yoshitaka Naito 115 lbs

Marat Gafurov vs. Kazunori Yokota 145 lbs

Christian Lee vs. Rocky Batolbatol 145lbs

T. Nastyukhin vs. Robert Lisita 145 lbs

Leandro Ataides vs. Marcin Prachnio 185 lbs

Anatpong Bunrad vs. Eugene Toquero 125 lbs

Y. Sityodtong vs. Chrech Kosal 135 lbs

Kyal Linn Aung vs. Shannon Wiratchai 145 lbs

Pongsiri Mitsatit vs. Ye Thway Ne 115 lbs

Kev Hemmorlor vs. K. Konsrichai 145 lbs

Keep up to date with all the latest news with expert comment and analysis from our award-winning writers