This summer, the Museum of Science Fiction in Washington, DC will open the "Future of Travel" exhibition at Reagan National Airport beginning on July 7, 2015.

As planned, the four-month exhibition will feature a large-scale Orion III spaceplane from 2001: A Space Odyssey, retro-futuristic travel posters by artist Steve Thomas, and a companion mobile app that will provide visitors with exhibit information, an interstellar passport, and their own "boarding pass to the future."

The mobile app will have an “Expedia-style” Plan-Your-Visit section to generate a simulated boarding pass that can be emailed to the traveler. The traveler could select a destination: the Moon, Alpha Centauri, or Mars – Climb Olympus Mons! Hike the Mars Rover trails! Stay in floating hotels! Remember your sunscreen! Travel to the Moon – Best view of the Earth! Visit the first moon landing monument!

BP Taylor of ScottModels finishing the Orion III Spaceplane from 2001: A Space Odyssey

With aerospace companies like XCOR, Virgin Galactic, and SpaceX turning science fiction into reality by developing and launching reusable space vehicles, it seems like the future is nearly here - any day now we'll all be able to hop a sub-orbital jet and reach the other side of the world in just a few hours.

Early progress on the Orion III Spaceplane

Orion III Spaceplane nearing completion, donning the Pan Am markings of the late 1960s

Tour the Nation's Capitol by Hovermobile and the 2001 Space Pen

You'll be able to download your own "interstellar passport" from our companion mobile app for special access to future Museum activities

You'll be able to download your own "boarding pass to the future" from our companion mobile app for special access to upcoming Museum events

In this exhibition, we reflect on the visions of artists from 50 years ago and invite visitors to imagine the potential of interplanetary travel - where we could go, and how we might get there.

Your choice of retro-futuristic travel posters signed by artist Steve Thomas

The Museum of Science Fiction is a 140-person all-volunteer organization. Everyone involved is donating their time and professional expertise to make the Museum a reality. The specific team that made this exhibition possible includes:

Regan Samul, Curator

Katherine Kidwell, Associate Curator

BP Taylor, Model Construction

Steve Thomas, Artist

Alexandre Carvalho, CIO, mobile software development

Steve Dreyer, Model Construction Subcommittee Chairman

John Detrich, Graphics

R. Paul Stimers, K&L Gates

Keith Jodoin, Sapling Pictures

Hal Davis FAIA, David Greenbaum FAIA, SMITHGroupJJR

Jerry Vanek AIA, Exhibition proposal design

Hannah Hoare, Product Management and Sourcing

James Hedrick, Project Management

Jonathan Spencer, General Counsel

Tom Stoker, Casework

Will O'Neill, Digital Communities

Nico Pandi, Public Relations

This exhibition is our first chance to share what we're doing as we work towards establishing a permanent institution, and of course, there are some expenses involved ...

That's where we need your help.



We need to raise $7,500 to help with shipping, storage, and display of the "Future of Travel" exhibition. It might seem like a modest goal, but it will allow us to properly care for these objects until their permanent home is ready. If you help us surpass that, we have a few stretch goals planned so that your generosity and support might allow us to take the "Future of Travel" on the road!

Aluminum luggage tag and playing cards for your next sub-orbital flight

Beyond the warm fuzzy feeling you'll get from supporting the Museum, we have some sweet backer rewards planned that are all inspired by the iconic design of 2001: A Space Odyssey, from original art playing cards to a special travel poster signed by the artist himself. These items will only be offered through THIS Kickstarter campaign, so don't miss out! Take your time, browse our list, and pick out something you like - but I can tell you, our limited-edition travel tumblers and Museum of Science Fiction 'wing-pins' are personal favorites of the Museum's curator.

Zero-g travel tumbler and rocket fuel canister suitable for coffee or liquid hydrogen (just kidding about the H2)

His and her t-shirts, ideal for use at home or on lunar safari

The Museum of Science fiction is a 501c(3) nonprofit organization.

The Museum will show how science fiction continually inspires individuals, influences cultures, and impacts societies. Also serving as an educational catalyst to expand interest in the science, technology, engineering, art, and math (STEAM) areas, the Museum uses tools such as mobile applications and wifi-enabled display objects to educate and entertain.

To learn more about what we’re doing and who is involved, the following links will provide more information:

Museum website | Preview Museum | Leadership | Board of Advisors | Join

Quarterly Project Updates and Newsletters | Wikipedia | Facebook | Twitter

Thanks for your support!