"Dating an annoying girl who is really pretty"

I have to admit, the PS4 not only has a beautiful look to its shell, but under the hood it delivers gorgeous graphics as well. And well, that's about it. Everything else for me has been underwhelming, dissapointing and at times downright frustrating. For instance, the UI in comparison to its predecessor in the PS3 pales in comparison. Not only is it not that organized, but it's completely riddled with advertisements that I don't want to see. It almost feels like having to wade through junk mail just to get to anything useful. The "recently met" section where you'd think would be a list of everyone you recently encountered online, is only the people you actually are friends with online. So annoying. So you have to manually type in someone's name if you'd like to add them as a friend. It gets worse. Last night when the internet was down, I popped in a DVD to watch a movie and the ps4 told me I could not watch the movie because it required an internet connection to access the playback or something along those lines. Seriously? Also to play games online it requires Playstation Plus which costs $4/month. Sure it's not that much money, but it's annoying as hell since ps3 online was free. Sony is pulling a Microsoft on us. The battery life on the dual shock 4 controller (DS4) is embarrassing as well. It seems like it lasts 4 hours. I'm sure it lasts a little longer, perhaps 6 or so, but comparing that to the dual shock 3 which lasts upwards to 20, sometimes 30 hours, it's annoying having to remember to charge it every night. And when it's charging the big ol' yellow light bar on the back of the controller lights up my whole room. Speaking of the light bar, that's what really drains the battery and there isn't even an option to turn it off which is really annoying during movies. When you're playing a game and the room lights are on, you don't even notice the damn bar. It's absolutely mind blowing that Sony would choose to omit the option to turn it off. The touchpad on the DS4 can't even be used to control the cursor or the internet browser. Can you believe that? If you're considering the competition, the Xbox One is just as bad as the PS4. That's what is so frustrating. There is no obvious choice here, like last generation. The PS3 was an amazing system and the PS4 is a step back. The graphics are mind blowing, but to enjoy them you have to pay more than the price of money.Read full review

Verified purchase: Yes | Condition: New