While little Nieyely Lopez's mother Nicole worked two jobs, her mother's boyfriend, Antonio Harris, 19, would often baby-sit the 2-year-old.

In recent weeks, Nieyely's mother noticed that the child was reluctant to give Harris hugs and kisses, according to court records.

And she didn't question the bruises on the girl's face when Harris said she'd fallen off the bed.

So when Harris came to her job on Sunday to tell her Nieyely had stopped breathing, Nicole Lopez lied to police about several things, including her relationship with Harris, her daughter's last kiss and even her boyfriend's real name, according to court records.

Despite the initial lack of help from her, Lake Station detectives Sgt. Brian Williams and Sgt. Glen Gulley sorted through the facts to obtain murder, neglect of a dependent and battery charges against Harris, of Gary.

Harris is in custody, being held without bail. Nicole Lopez has not been charged. Lake County Chief Deputy Prosecutor Barbara McConnell said Lopez did finally cooperate in the investigation and agreed to testify against Harris.

Nieyely died Sunday morning at the Methodist Hospitals Northlake campus after Harris and his aunt flagged down a Gary fire truck on Lake Street in Miller, seeking help for the child, whose body was cold and lifeless.

A coroner reported that Nieyely Lopez, 2, died of "multiple blunt force traumatic injuries." Her death was ruled a homicide.

An autopsy revealed Nieyely suffered "blunt force injuries including a lacerated liver, bleeding to the right chest, rib fracture of right side, severe bruising of diaphragm from ribs, severe internal bruising, multiple lacerations to liver from a crushing blow (stomp on ground or punch against wall)" and knots on her head from knuckles or fingers, the probable cause affidavit states. She probably died from a cut to a blood vessel in her liver, and the injuries were less than 24 hours old, the affidavit states.

Lopez first told police Harris was her cousin and that she knew him only as "Tone," but later admitted they had been dating and living together for a few months. She worked at an area nursing home and Illinois night club while he stayed at home with the child. Lopez said that the child seemed sluggish Saturday night but claimed she saw no bruises or marks on the child. She told detectives that Harris had said the ligature-type mark on the child's neck was not from a string or rope.

2-year-old-girl found cold and unresponsive May 17, 2015 in Lake Station, Indiana. Child sustained blunt force trauma according to police. (WGN TV) 2-year-old-girl found cold and unresponsive May 17, 2015 in Lake Station, Indiana. Child sustained blunt force trauma according to police. (WGN TV) SEE MORE VIDEOS

When speaking to police, Lopez said Harris "was quiet but he can 'snap' easily," according to court documents.

She also asked to take a voice stress test to prove she was telling the truth. Gary Detective Roberto Figueroa performed the test and asked her questions about whether she had physically punished the child. She said no and passed the test, according to court documents.

Harris denied injuring the child, the affidavit states. He said Lopez lied about knowing his name because he might have felony warrants, and claimed the child was hurt by falling furniture, such as stereo speakers or bunk beds. The Lake Station detectives, however, searched the home and found nothing out of place, the affidavit states.

Gary police took Lopez and Harris into custody, but the case was handled by Lake Station when it was determined that the deadly injuries occurred at Lopez's apartment in Lake Station.

lcaldwell@post-trib.com