Guest essay by Eric Worrall

The Australian ABC, a government news organisation, reports that 100s of scientists who attended a 4 day conference in Australia’s capital Canberra last week are all sad about what we are doing to our planet. But there is something we can do to help.

Climate change: Scientists sad, frustrated as extreme weather becomes the new norm By Riley Stuart Call it fatigue, call it frustration, but some of the best brains in the country are fed up. Australia’s leading climate scientists joined their New Zealand counterparts in Canberra for a four-day conference last week, but dark clouds lingered over their discussions. The theme of the conference was “Australasian weather, climate and oceans: past, present and future”. And global warming was never far from the guests’ lips. “There is definitely what you would call ‘climate fatigue’ on the part of scientists,” said Dr Andrew Glikson, from the Australian National University’s School of Archaeology and Anthropology. “There were hundreds of scientists there, and my impression is while we continue to do the science as best we can, there is a fatigue when it comes to arguing in public. …

Read more: http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-02-15/climate-change-blamed-for-australia-extreme-weather-events/8268692

Will Stefan, one of the authors of The Anthropocene Equation, a claim that 0.7C / century is exceptional, attended the event. Apparently he was sad as well.

I understand how deeply these people care, which is why I have decided to do something to help.

Please sign my change.org petition, Help Climate Scientists avoid Personal CO2 Emissions.

When climate scientists have full time access to world class video conferencing technology, they will be able to avoid attending all those climate conferences in person. Climate scientists will be able to avoid the mind numbing guilt they must currently feel about their personal carbon footprints, as they soar above our heads flying on CO2 belching jet aircraft to attend all those climate conferences.

Please take the time to show you care. Sign the Petition, and if you have time, leave a personal message of support for our hard working jetset climate community.

Don’t forget to send the petition to your friends, so they can sign as well.

Advertisements

Share this: Print

Email

Twitter

Facebook

Pinterest

LinkedIn

Reddit

