San Diego County District Attorney Bonnie Dumanis announced Thursday she is resigning in July. The district attorney said she is being encouraged to run for the San Diego County Board of Supervisors.

RELATED: District Attorney Bonnie Dumanis Will Not Seek Re-Election In 2018

Dumanis said she has not yet decided whether to pursue a candidacy. But in a letter to her staff sent Thursday morning, she said she believes her experience coupled with the role the board plays in public safety and policy issues would make her an effective supervisor.

Carl Luna, Mesa College political science professor, said the transition could be an easy one.

“The only downside is you may not have the experience as a district attorney that you have as an administrative supervisor, it’s a much more political role than the district attorney’s role.”

Dumanis said serving as district attorney has been an “absolute privilege and one of the highest honors” of her professional life.

RELATED: New Documents Show San Diego DA And Former US Attorney Texted About Azano Case Despite Recusal

The Chair of the San Diego County Democratic Party, Jessica Hayes, released the following statement:

“Just two days prior to the District Attorney’s resignation announcement, press reports revealed that the DA was a ‘subject of the investigation’ in the Azano corruption saga and had improper contacts regarding the case with the then-U.S. Attorney.



“The public deserves to know the extent of the District Attorney’s involvement in the Azano corruption scandal, and whether any other personnel in the DA’s office acted improperly.

“I’m calling on the County Board of Supervisors to launch an independent investigation headed by a special prosecutor into the Office of the District Attorney’s connection with this far-reaching case – the largest political corruption scandal in San Diego history.

“Adding to a story already steeped in backroom politics and insider dealing, Dumanis’ early resignation now paves the way for the Board of Supervisors to appoint her replacement before the voters have a say. Anyone seeking to become San Diego’s next District Attorney should pledge to support an independent investigation into the DA’s role in this political corruption case.

“Because San Diego’s chief law enforcement officer is implicated, an independent investigation is the only way for justice to be served. This is no time for business-as-usual politics.

“It would be a grievous breach of the public’s trust to appoint a new DA until the independent investigation is concluded. The public has the right to know the full extent of the involvement of personnel in the DA’s office with this scandal.”

Read Dumanis' letter below:

Ladies and gentlemen:

As you know, I am not seeking re-election and therefore, my time as San Diego County District Attorney is coming to an end. Since I first announced my intentions to you in January, many of you have been asking about my future plans. As I have weighed that future, among the many things I have been encouraged to consider is a run for San Diego County Board of Supervisors.

To be clear, I have not decided if I will be a candidate or not. I believe my experience, and the critical role that the Board plays in public safety and policy issues, would make me an effective member. However, I do not want to create any conflict with, or distraction from the important work of the District Attorney’s Office. Therefore, I feel it’s appropriate for me to resign at this time as I explore my potential candidacy.

As you can imagine, having spent 30 years of my life in this office, this has been a difficult decision. I’ve spent 43 years in public life and it has been my honor to work on behalf of San Diegans rising from an entry-level Clerk Typist, to Investigative Assistant, Deputy District Attorney, Juvenile Court Referee, Municipal Court Judge, Superior Court Judge and elected District Attorney.

As I have considered the choices before me, I have decided my last day on the job will be Friday, July 7, 2017.

As you have heard me say many times before, serving as District Attorney has been an absolute privilege and one of the highest honors of my professional life. Working as DA alongside an incredibly talented group of professionals for nearly 15 years to deliver justice to the people of San Diego has been a richly rewarding experience. Each and every one of you has contributed to public safety in our County and collectively, your dedication continues to make this office among the best in the nation. Together, we have been leaders in change and a voice of justice for so many. I’m very proud of the unparalleled crime prevention and public outreach programs we’ve put in place and your unwavering commitment to supporting victims of crime.

It has not been an easy decision to close this chapter of my career as District Attorney. But knowing I have served with some of the most skilled professionals in the country makes me proud of what we've accomplished together. I believe the office is stronger than it was 14 years ago, that together we've made a difference in the lives of countless crime victims, and that you will no doubt continue to accomplish great things in the years to come.

San Diego District Attorney Bonnie Dumanis To Step Down In July GUEST: Amita Sharma, investigative reporter, KPBS News

Transcript for audioclip 34594

San Diego County District Attorney Bonnie Dumanis announced Thursday she is resigning in July. The district attorney said she is being encouraged to run for the San Diego County Board of Supervisors.

To view PDF documents, Download Acrobat Reader.