Reformed Abortion Clinic Director: ‘Our Goal Was Three to Five Abortions per Student’



(Examiner.com)

ROUND ROCK, Texas – Abortion clinics are businesses, just like muffler shops or fast food restaurants.

They need a steady parade of clients to survive, so they go out and create them in public schools.

That’s the conclusion Carol Everett came to after years of working as an abortion clinic manager in the Dallas-Fort Worth area.

Now a converted pro-life advocate, Everett is sharing this sickening reality with parents, lawmakers and anyone else who wants to listen, as often as she can.

Public school sexual education programs run by pro-choice groups “break down the natural modesty (of students), they separate them from their parents and their values … and they eventually give them low-dose birth control pills they know they’ll get pregnant on,” Everett told Progressives Today.

“They don’t tell parents what they’re doing.”

Everett understands the tactics used by pro-choice organizations like Planned Parenthood because she earned a living in the profitable abortion industry. She ran four different abortion centers in the Dallas-Fort Worth area between 1977 and 1983, when she changed her position on the issue.

Everett says she oversaw approximately 35,000 abortions.

In 1995, Everett founded The Heidi Group, “a non-profit organization dedicated to helping girls and women with unplanned pregnancies make positive, life-affirming choices for themselves and their babies.”

Everett has offered expert testimony in courts across the nation, as well as for 33 state legislative committees and a congressional committee.

Despite her efforts, and the work of countless pro-life groups, many parents don’t understand what their children are learning about sex at school, or more importantly, how their kids are being targeted as potential clients by the abortion industry.

“We went to the schools as early as kindergarten,” Everett said of her years working in the industry. During those sessions, sex ed instructors “are planting the seed (in student’s minds) that parents don’t know what they are talking about.”

In elementary schools, the sex ed curriculum utilizes several books – such as Robie H. Harris’ “It’s So Amazing,” “It’s Perfectly Normal,” and “It’s Not the Stork” – to acclimate students to the idea of sex, and to promote sexual behaviors.

“By fourth grade they encourage them to masturbate alone, or in groups of four or five of the same sex,” Everett said. By fifth or sixth grade, the curriculum turns to “talking about having sex” and intentionally encourages a “parents don’t understand you” mentality.

“That’s when we gave them the low-dose birth control we know they’ll get pregnant on,” Everett said. The pills must be taken at exactly the same time every day, something those administering the pills know is very difficult, if not impossible, for most teens, she said.

Inevitably, many young girls become pregnant while still in school. Scared, vulnerable, and conditioned to avoid discussions of a sexual nature with their parents, they call the only people they think they can trust.

When crisis pregnancy counselors at Planned Parenthood and other abortion clinics get a troubled young girl on the line, “they … pull out their abortion script and use that to sell an abortion,” Everett said.

Inside the clinics, those performing abortions often rush through numerous operations a day, often going from one room to another without sanitizing, essentially maintaining an assembly line of clients.

“It’s more deceptive than people realize,” Everett said. “The abortion industry sells and re-sells their product.

“Our goal was three to five abortions per student for every student we could get.”

About 45 percent of women who have an abortion have more than one, she said.

Last year, Planned Parenthood’s net revenue came in at $1.21 billion, with roughly $540.6 million coming from taxpayer-funded government health services grants, according to a Planned Parenthood annual report cited by CNSNews.com.

Planned Parenthood clinics in six states have also received $655,192 to serve as Obamacare “navigators,” CNSNews.com reports. That means the staff at those clinics help convince the public to sign up for the President’s subsidized health insurance program.

So the President scratches the abortionists’ backs, and vice versa.

Texas lawmakers recently reduced the number of abortion clinics from 47 to nine, Everett said, and other states are making strides, as well.

Last week, lawmakers in Missouri passed a mandatory 72-hour waiting period for women seeking abortions, to give them more time to contemplate the decision, though there’s no guarantee the governor will sign off on the legislation.

Yet despite the progress, “there’s still this problem with people not understanding” that abortion providers are steering students toward sexual activities, with the ultimate goal of creating clients.

“People don’t realize the abortion industry is an industry, and it’s doing really well,” Everett said.

Authored by Victor Skinner