Flying Lotus may be known as a progressive hip-hop producer, but a Hillary Clinton joke that mocked her “blowjob” abilities as detrimental to her presidential resumé has riled up liberal fans.

While performing at the legendary Fox Theater in Oakland on Friday, Flying Lotus put aside a moment for banter with the audience — during which he delivered the controversial Hillary joke. Starting out with a monologue bashing Donald Trump, the rapper/producer quickly turned his sights toward the Republican nominee’s opponent.

Though such a move might usually sit well with Hillary supporters, his joke focused not on her leaderships skills but rather his perceived lack of her skills in the bedroom — alluding to former president Bill Clinton’s infidelity.

“I couldn’t possibly vote for a woman that doesn’t give an awesome blowjob.”

Despite the fact that Flying Lotus followed up the joke by saying that he would “vote for [Hillary’s] a** anyway,” the jab at Clinton did not sit well with her supporters.

Several fans at the show tweeted their displeasure with the comments about Hillary, a number of them even saying they left because of the Clinton joke.

Want more ladies at your show, @flyinglotus? Try not leading off the set with a misogynist joke about Hillary Clinton. — Katharine Moore (@KatharineTMoore) September 17, 2016

As the media storm brewed over the weekend, many expected the artist to come forward to ask for forgiveness or, at the very least, clarify. Instead, on Monday, Flying Lotus responded to the backlash with a clear message: He does not care if you are offended by his Hillary Clinton jokes.

Not only does he not care, he says that making such remarks about Hillary in front of his fans are a sign of intimacy. Clinton jokes, he says, are a way of “treating fans like family.”

The more PC and scared everyone gets, the more I love having a microphone to say some depraved shit u need to hear #cantwaitfortonight — FLYLO (@flyinglotus) September 17, 2016

Dear journos. I will always make dirty, racist, sexist jokes as long as I live because I think it’s funny. My mom raised me that way. — FLYLO (@flyinglotus) September 19, 2016

I treat my fans like fam in our time together. I will continue doing so. https://t.co/BmSvXCL8U4 — FLYLO (@flyinglotus) September 19, 2016

Fans were split about the way Flying Lotus chose to double down in the issue. On some counts, it looks like some of his admirers found the joke disrespectful, if not specifically to Hillary then to women in general. Others knocked his Clinton moment as juvenile.

I hope this is a joke I’ve looked up to you and your music for years https://t.co/Qy53Du2A9O — Murphy (@wildroseFL) September 20, 2016

flylo sounding like everyone’s rebellious teenage cousin on facebook https://t.co/M8Gbh9mAtU — not ravey anymore (@raveyspice) September 19, 2016

respecting ur mom is great but why respect ur mom’s lack of respect for others — ChordKnowerMaxo 9/25 (@chordslayermaxo) September 19, 2016

Still, that’s not to say everyone was upset. With such a divided presidential race, there were, of course, people happy to see Hillary get torn apart in any way possible. Also chiming in to defend Flying Lotus’ Clinton joke was the usual social media chorus speaking out against rampant political correctness.

@flyinglotus Stereotypes are funny when you don’t believe in them, they’re caricatures made of words — jacek (@1jacek) September 19, 2016

@flyinglotus never met u but proud of u, never change. Offend more people we need u. World needs it. — Gentle Ben (@benjaminnorthey) September 19, 2016

Flying Lotus may have even more up his sleeve than crude jokes about Hillary. He closed off his “no apologies” message by chuckling to himself about how these critics would react to his upcoming full-length feature film Kuso, which features tunes by electronic music legend Aphex Twin, reported Resident Advisor.

When the offending Hillary Clinton joke was delivered, Flying Lotus was performing at Brainfeeder — two-nights of funk and hip-hop featuring George Clinton, Shabazz Palaces, Thundercat, and the Gaslamp Killer, reported SF Gate.

[Featured Image by Justin Sullivan and Bryan Bedder/Getty Images]