Get the biggest Rangers stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

MARK WARBURTON admits an 11th straight win in the Scottish Championship over St Mirren was largely down to the heroics of Wes Foderingham.

And he believes the 24-year-old - who was a youth international - is showing all the attributes needed to be England goalkeeper one day.

Foderingham produced a number of terrific saves as Gers maintained their 100 per cent start to the league campaign with a hard-fought 1-0 win in Paisley.

Warburton said: "It's the busiest Wes has been by far this season and he pulled out two or three outstanding saves.

"He's a top-class goalkeeper and you saw the quality he displayed again - his shot-stopping is first-class.

"I think Wes has the capability to go to a much higher level. I don't mean that in terms of the club but in terms of levels in the game.

"He has delivered the goods time and time again and he'll just keep getting better and better."

Asked if he is good enough to be an international keeper, Warburton added: "I think he could be. You look at his distribution, his shape.

"He comes for crosses, he's assured and dominates his area. You saw his quality again in this game."

Jason Holt claimed the only goal of the game in the first half and Rangers held on for the narrow win.

In Pictures: The best images from today's 1-0 win for Rangers against St Mirren..

Warburton said: "We weren't at our best for the whole game but we created four or five very good chances in the first half.

"The finish for the goal was sublime but we had two or three others that we should have put away.

"We were six out of 10. We were slack with the ball and the players are the first to admit it.

"But to come to this venue, against this type of opponent, and get the three points is really pleasing.

"Everyone is saying we are only winning by one or two but we are winning games of football at tough venues against teams who are not going to do what we want them to do.

"St Mirren was a tough test and we dealt with it."

Saints boss Ian Murray had nothing but praise for his own players.

He said: "The game plan almost worked and we have given Rangers as good a run for their money as anyone this season.

"You have to give good goalkeeping its due - he's probably won the game for Rangers.

"We could look at whether we could've done better with our finishing but overall I've got no complaints with our performance or effort.

"The challenge now is to maintain that standard."