





Nickelodeon's Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles is back with an all new season starting on Sunday, March 19th, 2017. Tales of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles takes us on a journey through several stories from the Turtles' past and future. From their first days in New York to their wild and crazy escapades on different planets, fans of the first four seasons can expect to see new friends and foes as well as familiar ones as each story is unveiled.The best part about the new season? Mark Hamill (Star Wars) will be guest staring as Kavaxas, a mean dragon with some crazy powers, in the season premiere entitled “Scroll of the Demodragon.” In the episode, Kavaxas teams up with other villains from the franchise to bring New York to its knees. It is also noteworthy to mention Hamill will be lending his voice for Kavaxas over the next three episodes after the premiere as well.



Along with the special guest stars, the original voice cast is back in action as well with Seth Green (Robot Chicken) as Leonardo, Sean Astin (Lord of the Rings) as Raphael, Rob Paulsen (Planet Sheen) as Donatello, Greg Cipes (Teen Titans) as Michelangelo, Mae Whitman (Parenthood) as April O’Neil, Hoon Lee (Royal Pains) as Master Splinter and Kevin Michael Richardson (Penguins of Madagascar) as Shredder.





Special Guest Stars Include:

Chris Sarandon (The Princess Bride) as Count Vlad Dracula, the lord of the vampires.

Graham McTavish (The Hobbit trilogy) as Savanti Romero, an evil time master from the future.

Dana DeLorenzo (Ash vs. Evil Dead) as Esmeralda, a kind and weary Romanian traveler with an expert knowledge of monsters.

Cary-Hiroyuki Tagawa (Revenge) as Sumo Kuma, a fierce and cunning Samurai commander.

Nyambi Nyambi (Mike & Molly) as Verminator Rex, the vicious leader of a gang.

About Tales of The Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles:



Since its launch in 2012, Nickelodeon’s CG-animated Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles has re-energized these iconic characters of this wildly popular franchise. Currently in its third season, the series is seen in over 170 countries and territories, and translated in over 50 languages. Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles follows four mutant turtles—Leonardo, Raphael, Donatello and Michelangelo—trained in the art of ninjutsu by their mutant rat sensei, Master Splinter, who teaches the turtles to battle evil from the New York City sewers.