51

2808 Phelan Ln

Redondo Beach , CA 90278



(310) 214-1627

Saw the tips mention it, but no reviews yet... Phelan Good is now closed and is a Brazilian sandwich shop. RIP breakfast burritos and bananas foster French toast... You will be missed. :(

Love this place. Nothing super fancy but I love that it's in te neighborhood. The guys who run it are super great too. They cook a mean meal too!!

The shop is located at the center of an all residential area/ streets. If it wasn't for Yelp and Navigation, it's going to be hard to find this place. Weird area but very convenient to all the residential. Surrounded right smack in the middle of all but nothing residential streets, a very tiny shopping center with a liquor store, and dry cleaner next to a small park. It's tasty! I get their breakfast croissant which is with cheese, egg and thin sliced ham. Costs me almost $6.00 !!! Yes, its tasty because its grilled and greasy, and if you eat it right away. Just the little croissant with no sides was $6. Pretty pricey!! :-( If you check in with your phone, you can get 50Cents off a sandwhich, which I didn't even use.

Well, this is unfortunate. My favorite neighborhood cafe is anything but that now... Been doing a lot of traveling, so its been 6-7 weeks since I had the cafe. This past Saturday, a friend and I decided to order breakfast to pick-up. Called in - noticed a new voice on the other end but they've had help in the past and everything seemed normal - and we ordered a breakfast burrito with bacon and a sourdough sandwich with sausage, adding avocado. I was definitely disappointed in what we got. For $15 (including the $1 + all change tip) we received 1 under-seasoned breakfast burrito and - I am not kidding here - a HALF sourdough sandwich which they charged my $1.50 to add avocado to. I was shocked and confused. Furthermore, I didn't notice either Jason or Josh - there was clearly a hired on cook, the kid I spoke to on the phone and what appeared to be a new owner in a polo shirt and gold chain, clearly not prepping food. The menu, however, was the same though the portion sizes had clearly changed for the worse and I noticed they were using a cheaper wax paper that melted cheese just had its way with (not bad but indicative of major cost-cutting). Despite the same menu, I am suspecting this place is under new ownership. I noticed that the weekend specials emails dried up about 2 months ago, no Jason or Josh working when one or both were there any time I had frequented in the past year and the drastic cost-cutting changes. I think its fair to say I probably will be crossing this one of my list of eateries I visit often. It's a pity - Jason and Josh were making some really good food for awhile there.

Phelan Good left me Phelan a bit pissed off!, now don't get the wrong impression this food tasted real good and so could have been a 5 Star review, so WHY only 2 Stars? Hidden in the middle of a residential neighborhood next to a small park you'd probably not drive by this place and say hey let's eat here unless you might be visiting someone in the area. It's a cool little spot with a chalkboard menu on the wall that has a pretty good selection of Breakfast, Lunch and Dinner..... I actually came out of my way to come here for ONE reason!, NOT just any Breakfast Burrito, But...... one called "Go Back to Bed Breakfast Burrito" ingredients are as follows; 4 Meats, Steak, Bacon, Sausage and Ham, 6 Eggs, 2 Salsa's, Potato's and Cheese wrapped in two large flour tortillas. $12.95 http://www.yelp.com/biz_photos/EeZkpERJz2CBRNPFc0deeQ?select=5Qg1_F1KKgl1PObiIH2vEQ Sounds like it could be "The Ultimate Breakfast Burrito" and that's why I'm here, as you can see from the photo above this burrito is massive, just look at the knife and fork compared to the burrito, this is like one of those Man vs Food Challenges!. Instead of the four meats I asked for ALL Bacon, so I'm expecting Bacon, Bacon, Bacon and more Bacon, with the eggs, potato's and cheese...... at this point I'm thinking I've finally found The Ultimate Breakfast Burrito, until http://www.yelp.com/biz_photos/EeZkpERJz2CBRNPFc0deeQ?select=B1fA8pt5F0rlasMpKeZ-Fg WOW, where's the Bacon?, you've got to be kidding me!. I've totally just got SCREWED...... NO WAY there is the equivalent of four different meats here, for $12.95 this should have been loaded with FULL STRIPS of BACON, and with the SIX eggs and potato's I couldn't taste the bacon bits and finding them was like finding Waldo. BIG DISAPPOINTMENT, the eggs were cooked to perfection nice, light and fluffy, did not have potato overload but a good balance, cheese was also minimal could have had a bit more, it came with red salsa inside couldn't get much flavor from it and zero heat, it also came with a side of green salsa that was a watery flavorless mess!. It's Big, it could easily feed 2-3 people, though I only ate half, I probably could have been a pig and ate the whole thing but definitely would have had to "Go Back to Bed", As for flavor the burrito was good if you like eggs and potato's but with a lack of meat and a price of $12.95 hence the 2 Stars.

Phelan Good Cafe sounds like "Feelin Good Cafe" ... am I thinking too much?? This is the kind of place that I hope will thrive and stick around for a while but it definitely needs people's help to spread the words due to it's hidden and sorta unconventional location for an eatery. Phelan is a new neighborhood cafe in this part of North Redondo. It's been open for about 5 months. Owner Josh is also the chef and sorta runs the whole show. Very friendly guy. Fun fact: he used to live on Catalina Island and worked as a chef there. The cafe itself has very minimal seating. It's not a service restaurant but it's a great place to grab some quick bites to eat. You order at the counter and wait for your food. There's about 2 tables inside and 3 on the patio outside. The cafe is clean with a modern vibe. Everything is mostly in black and white and the decor is kept quite simple. I dig the atmosphere because it doesnt come with the chaos and crazy long lines at Eat @ Joe's and it's definitely classier than places like El Burrito Jr or other diners. While the cafe is small, it does not feel cluttered. So no worries you claustrophobic folks. I do dig their breakfast burrito. For $4.95 + tax, you can get a solid size burrito with fresh off the grill potatoes, cheese and eggs. It's big. So far I'd eat eat half of it and save the other half for later. You can add meat for additional dough. While walking out, I saw some folks eating their sandwiches which looked very well presented. I would like to go back and try the Portobello Mushroom Sandwich. Can you tell I'm not a meat person yet? heheh ~ One downfall is that I wish Phelan had fiber friendly breakfast options ... ie: oatmeal with fresh fruits or for the sweet tooth people, pancakes and waffles. But like Yelper Elliot S. have mentioned, the owner takes suggestions... so perhaps the menu might expand upon more customer recommendations. Anywho, check out Phelan! Go support Josh so he can stick around. :D

What everyone is saying on Yelp is true! After passing the signs for Phelan Good Cafe I was curious, and looked them up online. Based on Yelp reviews, I *had* to try one of the breakfast burritos. I wasn't sure what to expect (the last time I had been in that location, my now-30-year-old brother was playing the little league equivalent of basketball in the park next door), but the cafe is clean and makes good use of the space. I had called ahead and asked what time they stopped serving breakfast, and was told by Josh that if there isn't a line he pretty much never says no to making breakfast. So, when we showed up about a half hour after official breakfast time ended, I was glad to see we had just beaten the lunch rush. My friend ordered an egg, cheese and potato breakfast burrito, and I got mine with sausage. I was pretty much focused on just the breakfast part of the menu because I knew what I wanted, but the rest that I scanned seemed really good--I love a well curated and thoughtful menu. We chatted with Josh a bit while he made our burritos, really cool guy. And then we stuffed our faces, and it was glorious. After living away from California for 7 years, I hadn't had a breakfast burrito in a while, and it was everything I hoped it would be. Everything was the right size so you have a nice mix of textures and tastes. Others have noted that the salsa isn't terribly impressive, and I'd agree, but I alternated between the salsa and spicy Srircha, which I enjoyed. I will definitely be back! I'd like to say I'd try the other menu items (I saw a few sandwiches being made that looked great), but realistically, I don't know if I can stray from that breakfast burrito. PS We signed up for their email newsletters, and this morning I got a list of their specials. 1) I super appreciated that they put the recipients under "BCC", which some small businesses are not so good at doing; and 2) today's special was a breakfast burrito with avocado and pepperjack and bananas foster french toast--the point being, sign up for their newsletter, because those specials sound damn good.

This place is quite small, no music in the background, very simple, the food and service was great! I had the Phelan Ciabatta with avocado and organic green tea. Then I decided to purchase one of their homemade red velvet mini cakes Togo... Yummm! If your looking for a really good wholesome sandwich made with great love, here's the place to go. The guy had an awesome attitude and made really good food! I'll definently come back again when I come back to this area. :) FYI , he dosen't mind you playing music off your phone since its pretty quiet there any how. As long as its decently PG-13. ;)

I have been to Phelan (feeling) Good 4 times after finding it on Yelp. Two guys own it and are working hard to make a go of it. The food is prepared fresh to order and takes a bit longer than fast food. But is sure is worth the wait. My guests and I have had a range of sandwiches but always get the garlic griddle fries...yes, cooked on the griddle. From breads, to ingredients, it has always been delicious. The selections all seem to have a little unique twist on the ingredients or preparation. But best of all, the prices are very reasonable. Stop by and support the two fellows as they work hard to provide fresh, delicious and reasonably priced food.

I'm so glad they've got something good in this location again. I almost cried when North Beach Deli closed last year. While I miss Nick and his awesome soups, I think Phelan Good Cafe may be able to fill the hole that North Beach Deli left when they closed their doors. Owner Josh and cook Jason are both awesome, friendly guys who are eager to please. They'll remember your name and ask you about your day. They also take recommendations (Josh added a vegetarian item to the menu on my request, a portabello mushroom ciabatta sandwich). Everything I've eaten here so far (probably six times in the last month or so since they opened) has been delicious, speedy, and reasonably priced. Don't tell Josh, but I'd pay even more for their food since they're in walking distance to my house, two minutes away. I highly recommend a burrito for breakfast, or a croissant sandwich for lunch. The hot drinks hit the spot for me too. The specials are awesome for lunch or dinner as well. Free wifi is a bonus. Come support this new business and help Josh be successful! You can take my word for it, he's worth it.

Wow, this place is tiny. Horrible location, I really feel for them, it is one of the worst locations I've ever seen for an eatery. I think the top of Mt. Fuji gets more traffic, actually, it probably does. Really cool menu though, I wanted to get a sandwich but couldn't decide right away. The only dude working there recommended the breakfast burrito, so I ordered the bacon. It was freakin' massive! Awesome price too, a lil more than $5. It seriously was a bomb in the belly. I had an extra long lunch break, & fell into a post burrito nap after stomach insertion. The tomatillo sauce it came with was forgettable, so I switched it for Sriracha. Definitely wanna go back though, like I said nice menu, burgers & such, and the prices are quite reasonable. Plus, I feel bad for them, like your friend who had to buy 50 tickets to play the Whiskey & is trying to sell them off desperately just to break even.

Been meaning to try this place since it opened as I think the name is really clever! Finally came for breakfast this weekend. Had a breakfast burrito with eggs, cheese and potatos - was really good and big! Their hot chocolate is also tasty. Their menu is alittle limited, but it has all the staples. Breakfast has bagel or croissant sandwiches and burritos. Lunch is all burgers and sandwiches. I think they may also be open for dinner on weekends. Inside is really small. There are three 2-seater patio tables and another 1 or 2 outside. Decor is pretty minimal but it works - painted concrete walls and a giant chalk board menu. No sound absorbers, so it gets really loud when they have the fan going. There were 3 people working behind the counter and all were incredibly nice and friendly. I will definitely return and try more of their menu!

I am very glad that this Cafe just opened, it is so convenient for me that I am already a frequent customer. Josh, the owner, is very friendly and his service is excellent. The menu is full of things you would normally find in an expensive restaurant, but the prices are affordable, even for a quick lunch. Everything I have tried so far has been excellent, I especially loved the bacon wrapped filet mingon, and all of their breakfast burritos are great. My latest purchase was the "go back to bed (breakfast) burrito" which contains four meats, 6 eggs, 2 salsas, potatoes and cheese. I also had an amazing crossiant stuffed with cream cheese and candied walnuts.

Visited, but decided not to eat. The restaurant is under new ownership. I tried ordering from the pictures of food posted by people for this restaurant but the cook did not recognize any of the food items. I tried to order: - the pastrami that's pictured "we don't have that" - the banana fosters french toast "we don't have that". The cook then handed me a menu printed from an ink jet printer in a sheet protector. I menu seems to be scaled back in contrast to the pictures of food items that are posted. For the record, this is less of a café and more like a full service deli. There are only 2 umbrella tables with 2 chairs each out front. . While not impressed with the aesthetics, I did not want to weigh the restaurant down to heavily with an unfavorable review because I did not actually try the food hence, the 3 star rating. The food may in fact be good. But I'll leave that for a more daring yelper to determine. If there's anything YELP could do, the pictures of the food items are inaccurate and misleading. It was the scrolling through the pictures that sold and I decided to navigate to that location.

This very tiny cafe is so unassuming but we went because of the 5 star reviews and because all the other places in Redondo were packed at 9:00 on a Sunday morning. The breakfast burrito and sandwich were simple yet amazingly tasty. Went back for lunch and the sandwich I ate was gone in under five minutes. It was so tasty I couldn't resist woofing it down. The Isreali Cous Cous is excellent. The food is fresh, the location may be outta the way but definitely worth going here is you live or work in the area. Rarely do you find a 5 Star / 1 Dollar Sign place and THIS IS IT!

As of November 2nd New owners took it over from the liquor store and are doing great, they added different flavors of tortilla shells to the bfast burritos! And they are going to have hot subs and ribs starting in dec!! !! And the new owners are long time locals of north Redondo !! Lots of changes coming to the Phelan Family Cafe!!

This place is an a pretty unexpected location. It seems to be in the middle of a neighborhood next to a small convenience store & catering company. I came here to grab a bite with my mom. We both ordered BLTAs (i think), & they were delicious. Staff was friendly. Food was served quickly.

I've frequented the Phelan Good Cafe since it opened and I have never been disappointed. The owner is so friendly and so are his staff, and the food is always fresh, delicious and made to order! All the specials are wonderful, especially the weekend breakfast specials. I signed up for their email list and I love waking up to their email specials - Red Flannel Hash, French Toast Sandwich and Chorizo & Egg Scramble, just to name a few. The Frisco burger is amazing and the homemade soups are delicious, filling comfort foods. Walk or ride your bike to Phelan Good Cafe ASAP! :)

Glad to have found this on here probably wouldn't have known about it otherwise... Really good breakfast burrito, good quality meat for the price, and excellent espresso! I'll be back for sure.