All characters are relatively the same except for the characters who are filling the role of the Scarecrow, the Tinman and the Lion.

Hermione continued groaning in pain from what had just transpired to her. So much pain that she fell into a deep coma. The last thing she remembered was entering Hogwarts' doors and being led into the clinic where she dreamed a hazy dream.

Hazy enough for Hermione to believe that she was in a middle of a storm, being whisked away along with the school into a far off land.

All the other students and teacher quickly left while touting brooms to fly away though Hermione continued to sleep. She slept as the school continued to soar into the sky. She slept as the school began to fall. She slept while the school fell through the clouds. She slept until the falling came to a sudden halt with a loud banging crash.

"What was that?!" Hermione asks after she wakes up and finds only her cat Crookshanks on top of her legs.

Hermione was very awake for a girl that had just woke up and begins to explore the school with Crookshanks following her every move.

She explored the school from every level, from the tunnels underneath it, to the towers above and found no one else inside other than her and Crookshanks.

"Maybe everyone is outside for a Quidditch game" Hermione told Crookshanks who was giving her a worried look that only a pet can make.

Without looking around anymore, Hermione opens the doors of the school and steps outside only to see a large amount of ninjas gather around her. Ninjas, ninjas everywhere but Hermione didn't have a clue as to what was happening.

"Oh Crookshanks," Hermione whispers. "I have a feeling we're not at Hogwarts anymore."

In a puff of smoke, an old man named Jiraiya appears before Hermione with large amounts of white hair and a red vest while holding a book titled "Makeout, Makeout Paradise".

"Are you a good ninja or a bad ninja?" Jiraiya begins to walk toward Hermione.

"Well," Hermione answered. "I'm not a ninja at all, I'm Hermione Granger from Hogwarts."

"Well, is that the ninja?" Jiraiya asked, points at Crookshanks, then proceeds to lift up the cat's tail for an observation. "Perhaps a cat girl ninja in disguise."

"Crookshanks is my cat!" Hermione answered "What are you doing to it?!"

"Well, I'm a little muddled, because the ninjas have called me here because a new ninja has arrived and has just dropped a school on the Wicked Ninja of the Snakes." Jiraiya explained while pointing around "There's the school, and here you are and there is all that remains of the Wicked Ninja of the Snakes."

Hermione looked and gasped at a person who looked surprisingly like Lord Voldemort, but with long black hair and a purple tongue jutting out of his motionless head which stuck out from under the school of Hogwarts. There was an odd name tag from a scratched head protector which said Orochimaru right next to the now dead ninja.

"So the ninjas here want to know, are you a good ninja or a bad ninja?" Jiraiya asked.

"But I've already told you, I'm not a ninja at all. Ninjas are old and creepy and would often spy on me while I'm taking a bath."

Jiraiya begins to laugh wildly with his arms to his side and his stomach and chest thrusting into the air as he does.

"What's so funny?" Hermione asked.

"I'm laughing because I am a ninja!" Jiraiya answered. "I'm Jiraiya, the good ninja of the frogs."

"You are?!" Hermione answers and tries to step back and away from Jiraiya. "And all those people?" Hermione asked nervously as well while pointing at the people around Jiraiya.

"They're ninjas too," Jiraiya answered. "and this is ninja land."

Hermione begins to run away from Jiraiya as soon as she could, following the closest road she could find through a leafy forest, which was yellow and bricked.

Crookshanks wasn't far behind and would alert Hermione when the ninja, Jiraiya, got closer asking Hermione to help him with his "research".

Hermione continued to run, thought quickly and shouted. "Accio!"

A broom quickly flew from the remains of the school and into Hermione's hand and she flew off at great speed with Crookshanks barely holding onto the broom's handle. Hermione almost touched the stratosphere but soon fell toward the middle of a grain field because she wasn't a good flyer.

"Ow!" Hermione commented while Crookshanks had managed to land beside her. "Now where are we? How do we get home?"

Hermione looked around and saw no hint of any good directions to follow but soon heard a voice "Maybe it's that way."

"Who was that?!" Hermione asked but received no answer.

However, Crookshank,being the brilliant cat that it was began hissing up a pole which alerted Hermione.

"What is it Crookshanks?" Hermione asked while looking up the pole and realized that it was a scarecrow's pole but instead of a scarecrow atop of it, it was a blonde boy in an orange jumpsuit who was stuck there.

"Who are you and how did you get up there?!" Hermione asked.

"My name is Naruto and I don't know?" the boy answered.

"What do you mean you don't know?!" Hermione asked again.

"Well, I don't know because I don't have a brain." Naruto answered.

"Don't have a brain?" Hermione was puzzled. "Then how can you talk?"

"Well, I know I talk a lot without a brain." Naruto answered. "For instance, I would be asking you to help me down from this pole instead of arguing if I had a brain."

"Oh." Hermione commented. "I guess you're right. So I should ask, how are you stuck there, maybe if I knew I would be able to help you down."

"I think the village people were trying to lynch me because I have this rope around my neck that keeps me up here." Naruto explained. "Of course I'm not bright about doing things, but if you cut off my head maybe I'll fall off."

"I don't think cutting off your head is a bright idea." Hermione answered slowly.

"But I don't see any other solution other than cutting off my head" Naruto said.

Hermione's mind was a bit cluttered after falling from the height of one of the earth's major atmospheres and had to think for a while.

"Maybe I can untie you." Hermione answered.

"But you'll need to untie knots, and I hate knots!" Naruto explained.

"Trust me, it's a lot safer than cutting off your head." Hermione answered.

"Oh fine!" Naruto agreed.

Hermione quickly flies up with her broom and begins untying Naruto who immediately plummets from the pole and onto the ground, landing on a now bloody nose.

"Ow!" Naruto yelled. "That wasn't safe at all, I have blood everywhere on the ground now. If you're a doctor, can you pick it up and put it back in me?"

"No, that's not how first aid works." Hermione said while floating down on her broom. "Why exactly did village try to lynch you?"

Naruto look extremely down trodden after Hermione had asked him her question.

"Because I'm a failure because I haven't got a brain." Naruto said sadly.

"But that doesn't explain anything." Hermione replied.

"You see." Naruto begins to sing:

I would wile away the hours

Annoying ninja scholars

Peeing on the grains

And I know I should be running

With prank I should be cunning

But I didn't have a brain

"I didn't ask for a song" Hermione commented though Naruto continues anyways.

I'd glue every griddle

On every individual

For chuckles and for games

With the thoughts I'd be thinking

I wouldn't be trapped by lures of bacon

But I didn't have a brain

Oh I would tell you why

Two plus five equals four

I could finish grammar school by age forty-four

And then my aim won't miss the floor

I would not be full of crayons

My mouth jammed with paint jobs

Which I licked off window panes

I wouldn't dance and be crazy

Hokage wouldn't be so angry

But I didn't have a brain

"That's nice and all," Hermione commented. "but I need to find a way home."

"Home?" Naruto asked. "I wouldn't know anything about that."

"Right," Hermione wasn't going to argue with that. "but do you know of anyone smarter than- say- you?"

"No clue." Naruto said proudly.

Hermione began thinking about the situation of trying to ask a question to a boy without a brain.

"Don't you know of any wizards at least?" Hermione asked. "I mean, you must have had some magical spell cast on you to survive so long without a brain."

"Wizard?" Naruto was puzzled. "I can think of the closest thing we have is the Hokage, he can make anything survive without a brain!"

"Really?!" Hermione was overjoyed. "He must be a powerful wizard then! I must see him."

"A powerful wizard?!" Naruto asked even though he should be the one providing the information "do you think he can give me a brain?"

Hermione was soon left speechless when Naruto began asking her about someone she never met before, even though Naruto was the person who brought up the subject.

"Sure..." Hermione said really slowly and pauses without knowing what more to tell Naruto.

"If that's true, I know where he lives!" Naruto said. "I just painted his house last week!"

"Really?!" Hermione was excited. "Take me to him please."

"Okay!" Naruto answered. "We're off to see the Hokage then!"

"Off we go!" Hermione said with her broom and Crookshanks behind her while they follow Naruto back onto the yellow brick road.