Allegiant (NASDAQ: ALGT) today announces new, nonstop flights from Memphis, Tennessee, New Orleans and Richmond, Virginia to Jacksonville, Florida. The company, known for its exceptional travel deals, is offering one-way fares for as low as $39.*



"We are truly pleased to add these three new flights to Jacksonville in such a short time period after launching service in 2015," said Jude Bricker, Allegiant senior vice president of planning. "We are confident that travelers from Memphis, New Orleans and Richmond will embrace our convenient, low-fare flights, bringing even more visitors and economic growth to the Jacksonville area."



Year-round nonstop service to Jacksonville International Airport (JAX) from:



New Orleans - Begins April 14, 2016 with fares as low as $39*

Memphis, Tennessee - Begins April 15, 2016 with fares as low as $39*

Richmond, Virginia - Begins April 15, 2016 with fares as low as $39*



The new flights will operate twice weekly and expand on the routes Allegiant currently operates to Jacksonville International Airport (JAX). With these three new flights, Allegiant will now serve five markets to the Jacksonville area after launching its first flights in 2015. The new flights will bring more than 50 thousand additional visitors each year to the Jacksonville area. Flight days, times and the lowest fares can only be found at Allegiant.com.



"With the announcement of nonstop flights to New Orleans, Richmond and Memphis, Allegiant will now provide service to five communities from JAX," Jacksonville Aviation Authority (JAA) CEO Steve Grossman said. "Our community's support of these flights is critical for travelers."

Allegiant offers a unique travel option to Jacksonville travelers. Focusing on low-cost leisure travel, the company provides customers with low base fares averaging nearly half of the cost of the average domestic round-trip fare. Allegiant's innovative business model has allowed the company to grow from one aircraft and one route just over a decade ago, to providing convenient, affordable service in over 100 communities nationwide.



*About the introductory one-way fares:

Seats are limited. Price includes taxes and fees. Fares are one way and not available on all flights. Must be purchased by Jan. 13, 2016 for travel by Aug. 16, 2016. Price displayed reflects purchase by debit card; purchase by credit card subject to surcharge not to exceed $8 each way per passenger. See Allegiant.com for details. For optional services and baggage fees, please visit Allegiant.com. Additional restrictions may apply.



About Allegiant



Las Vegas-based Allegiant Travel Company (NASDAQ: ALGT) is focused on linking travelers in small cities to world-class leisure destinations. The company operates a low-cost, high-efficiency, all-jet passenger airline through its subsidiary, Allegiant Air, while also offering other travel-related products such as hotel rooms, rental cars, and attraction tickets. All can be purchased through the company website, Allegiant.com. The company has been named one of America's 100 Best Small Companies by Forbes Magazine for five consecutive years. In 2014, AVIATION WEEK ranked Allegiant the Top-Performing Airline in North America for the third consecutive year.



Source: Jacksonville Aviation Authority