The Cupid Shuffle is always a hit during the Play Date at the Children's Museum of Phoenix on Saturday, February 20 2016. (Photo: Melissa Fossum/Special for azcentral)

The Children's Museum of Phoenix is offering grown-ups the chance to embrace their inner kid during an adult-only evening of food, drinks and favorite childhood games.

Started four years ago, Play Date is an after-hours event that invites adults to explore the museum's exhibits. Proceeds from the evening, generated through admission fees, bar sales and donations, go toward raising funds to support the museum.

The next Play Date is 7-11 p.m. on Saturday, Aug. 20.

'Throwback' games, photo booth and Pokemon Go

The event has proven to be popular in the past, with the last two Play Dates selling out. The August event is "well on track" to sell out, said Alex Wurth, special events manager at the museum.

During Play Date, guests have free rein of the museum's facilities, which includes three floors of interactive exhibits.

"Our adult guests are more than welcome to play on all of our exhibits," Wurth said.

Crowd favorites include activities hosted in the art studio, a forest of more than 1,300 foam pool noodles, and the Schuff-Perini Climber, which Wurth described as a structure resembling a tree house.

Wurth said other activities planned for Play Date include "retro and throwback" activities like Twister and Atari video games. Guests can also play other old-school games with a modern twist, such as giant Jenga and beer pong.

MORE EVENTS: Things to do in Phoenix this week | Biggest upcoming events | Top events for kids this week | Latest concert announcements | 5 pool parties around Phoenix | Summer concert guide

NEWSLETTERS Get the Things to do this weekend newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Best Things to do this weekend Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-332-6733. Delivery: Thurs Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Things to do this weekend Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Unlimited photos at the photo booth by Arizona Event Pic are included at no extra charge.

Wurth said the museum is also inviting Pokemon to the party for the upcoming event.

"For our guests with Pokemon fever … (there are) over 20 Pokemon on-site and three Pokestops," Wurth said. "For their gaming convenience, we will be setting lures all night."

This woman made sand art during the Play Date at the Children's Museum of Phoenix on Saturday, February 20 2016. (Photo: Melissa Fossum/Special for azcentral)

Open to guests 18 years and older

Whether guests are catching digital creatures or dancing the night away to DJ Miss Mixx, they can quench their thirst at any of the four cash bars set up around the museum.

Food can be purchased from a lineup of food trucks that includes local favorites like Frites Street, CarH's Kitchen LLC, Kruzin Cuisine and DeMarco's Italian Ice & Creams.

Play Date is open to guests 18 years and older. A photo ID is required for entry.

Wurth said he thinks the event lets adults relax, have fun and be kids again.

"I hear people mention that they can’t come to the children’s museum because they don’t have kids," he said. "This is the perfect opportunity to invite those people to the museum to see what we offer to the community."

MORE AZCENTRAL ON SOCIAL: Facebook | Twitter | Instagram | Pinterest

Play Date

When: 7-11 p.m. Saturday, Aug. 20.

Where: Children's Museum of Phoenix, 215 N. 7th Street, Phoenix.

Admission: $15 pre-sale on the Children's Museum of Phoenix website. $20 at the door while supplies last. Must be 18 years of age to attend, 21 to drink. Photo ID required for entry. 250 free parking spaces are available on-site.

Details: 602-253-0501, childrensmuseumofphoenix.org.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/2bxsL5A