A senior MP in the McGowan Government has been reported to the Local Government Department over personal donations to council candidates.

Darren West, parliamentary secretary to Alannah MacTiernan, was this week reported to the department over donations totalling $2500 made to candidates in Greater Geraldton and Esperance, because he failed to disclose the gifts in the correct time frame.

Under WA laws, both the donor and the candidate are required to disclose a gift worth more than $200 within three days of the transaction. The penalty is $5000 for each breach.

Nationals MP Martin Aldridge, who referred Mr West to the department, told Parliament on Thursday the matter was akin to Lord Mayor Lisa Scaffidi’s failure to disclose travel contributions.

“We have some good facts before us that Darren West, who is not just a member of this place but also a parliamentary secretary, has breached the local government regulations on at least three occasions,” Mr Aldridge said.

“I am going to be very interested to see whether my further questioning is answered in this place and whether the Premier will hold (him) to the same standard that he is holding other elected members in local government and will seek the resignation of Darren West.”

Mr West said he had been incorrectly advised, believing disclosure was required three days after the election. “As soon as I got the correct advice I disclosed the gifts,” he said.

It comes as full disclosure for the recent elections have been revealed, including a $9000 donation by Federal Liberal MP Ian Goodenough to new Joondalup mayor Albert Jacob.

On the disclosure form, both Mr Goodenough and Mr Jacob said the money was for the postage of a city-wide mail-out.

In Mandurah, new mayor Rhys Williams received almost $6000 in donations for his campaign via the GoFundMe website.

Mr Williams received another $29,000 in straight donations, including $3500 worth of advertising in local newspapers, from Strzelecki Group boss Greg Poland and $3025 from Australian Metal Workers Union WA secretary Steve McCartney.

Mr Williams’ predecessor, Marina Vergone, received gifts worth as much as $10,000 from a group called Friends of Marina.