If you are one of those avid travel journal readers or are constantly glued to National Geographic to learn about the most unique travel destinations, then you would have come across Waitomo Caves in New Zealand, where visitors take a boat journey to check out the illumination created by tiny fireflies that create ‘sky living’ lights. The phenomenon is so unique that it has become a staple in most traveller’s bucket list across the globe. But you need not go so far to witness this gorgeous sight! A tiny tribal village in Maharashtra is all set to host country’s first firefly festival.

Purushwadi, a village in Ahmednagar district of Maharashtra has been adopted by Grassroots, an organisation which is working towards promoting village tourism. It is home to million fireflies that light up summer nights like green glitter scattered on trees from May to July, every year.

The festival will be held from May 23 to July 6. Bonfires, fun village activities and traditional organic food just make the experience all the more unique. Grassroots organises tent camps at the village for the festival, which you need to book in advance or you can book a room at the MTDC resort in Igatpuri and then drive down to Purushwadi.

The village is quaint, green and there is much to explore. In the daytime engage is long, languid walks and sit by the riverbanks. You can help the villagers with their daily chores like sowing paddy, chopping wood or grinding wheat. As the sun sets, you can walk over to the valley to see how swarms of fireflies form a beautiful canopy of green lights and experience sheer magic come alive from fairytales.

How to get there from Chennai

Chennai->Mumbai->Purushwadi

Take a flight/train to Mumbai.Then you can drive down from Mumbai to Purushwadi (it is a four hour drive). You can also take a train to Igatpuri (about 90 km away from Purushwadi) or Kasara (about 100 km away from Purushwadi) and then drive down to Purushwadi.

It is time to plan a trip for this divine experience. Grassroutes curates the whole experience and you can check out their website.

Discover more things about Chennai: