Tea Party Nation president Judson Phillips sent out a conspiratorial email to members yesterday responding to the Obama campaign’s demand that Mitt Romney disclose his tax records, saying that Obama should release his college records to prove that he didn’t attend school “on a scholarship reserved for foreign students” and release medical records to show that he is not a drug addict, citing the report of “a man named Larry Sinclair claims that in 1999 he and Barack Obama had sex and then smoked crack cocaine.”

There are a lot of records that Americans should want to see from Barack Obama. To start with, there are his records from Occidental College so that the allegation that Obama attended that school on a scholarship reserved for foreign students can be resolved. Another record that Americans should be demanding Obama release are his records from Columbia and Harvard.

How does someone who is a self-admitted poor student, get into two of the most prestigious schools in America? Obama was admitted to Harvard law. Generally you need to have almost a perfect 4.0 to even have a shot at Harvard. Anyone want to bet Obama’s GPA was nowhere near that?

So how did he get in?

The important records that everyone should demand Obama release are his medical records. George Bush, John McCain, even John Kerry and Bill Clinton released voluminous medical records.

What did Obama release in 2008? It was a one page statement from a doctor saying he was in good physical condition.

That was it.

Why is this so important?

Obama by his own admission was a very heavy marijuana user in his youth. He has also admitted to using cocaine, though he denies using drugs such as heroin. He also says he was a significant drinker.

Why is this important?

Because these are all symptoms of addiction.

A man named Larry Sinclair claims that in 1999 he and Barack Obama had sex and then smoked crack cocaine. This is 1999, nine years before Obama would run for President.

Crack cocaine is very addictive. It is very destructive. Addiction specialist will tell you that a crack addiction is very tough to break.

Is Obama an addict? Was he an addict in the past?