Stardate 1355.09This morning was a buzz of activity as everyone made final preparations for departure.

Lala has now stepped from her role as acting captain. It’s now my turn to take over the command. Oh boy, I am still nervous. I have been coached on what proper commands to give to Yami and Mea to go into or out of warp. Things should be just fine, fingers crossed.

Meanwhile, Haruna is filling in for Tearju Sensei as communication officer. She’s actually talking to Yui Kotegawa back on Earth. We wanted to make sure that she would be familiar with our house, especially where the Devilukes lived. Kami help us if the whole house burns down because Yui-San accidentally flipped a switch she wasn’t supposed to flip.

Meanwhile, Tearju-Sensei and Yami were prepping the Warp core, making sure it could handle a long journey. Surprisingly, Mikan has taken an interest in how the Warp core works, and she’s been tailing after the two blond women as they went on an inspection around the core.

Zastin and his crew finally arrived after a brief trip back to Earth they wanted to make sure my Dad knew about the trip. Honestly, I wonder how he could survive the road to Comiket happens.

They came back from in their own ship, which the docked in the shuttle bay. Their vessel, along with the lunatique would both serve as transport shuttles to and from our starship, the Astroboy. Since both ships were both capable of some transwarp capabilities they also served as life boats should anything happen the the main ship. With luck, we may never have to explore these capabilities.

As soon as they arrived, Momo greeted them with some special uniforms. At first they looked like ordinary shirts from the local department store, but upon closer inspection, it was revealed that they were nothing I had ever encountered. They were made of materials so supple to the touch that she you put them on, they almost feel like nothing at all. You feel naked in them, as I found out when I put mine on. I had to add a black t-shirt underneath to reduce the discomfort. My uniform was yellow, bringing out out the hexagonal weaving in the fabric. Meanwhile, Zastin and his crew all got Red shirts to signify their role as security officers.

The girls, meanwhile had a different design: sleeveless with a short skirt that flew up when they made any sudden movement. Most of them, like me, are wearing normal clothing underneath, but some like Mikan chose to remain sleeveless.

Most of the girls are wearing blue, but Yami and Mea are wearing yellow, like me, and Haruna is wearing a Red uniform. Ryouko-Sensei, Run-chan and Kyouko-chan all wore special white uniforms, as they are the medical personal on this ship.

I’m still a little shocked by Kyouko’s being here. It’s so nice to see her after so long.

Preparations are nearly complete. We will be starting our departure procedures in a few hours. Stand by.