The 23rd annual Screen Actors Guild awards took place Sunday in Los Angeles and turned into a protest forum against President Donald Trump's immigration ban.

Host Ashton Kutcher set the tone early, and fellow actors and actresses followed suit throughout the show.

"Good evening, fellow SAG-AFTRA members and everyone at home -- and everyone in airports that belong in my America!" Kutcher said in his opening monologue.

Sen. Durbin: Trump's 'Impulsive' Immigration Order Sends Wrong Message

Kaine: 'No Coincidence' WH Issued Immigration Ban, Holocaust Stmt Same Day

Rob O'Neill: We Must Be Smart About Who We Let Immigrate to US

Actor David Harbour delivered a memorable speech as he and the 16-member cast of the Netflix series "Stranger Things" accepted the award for best Ensemble in a Drama Series.

"We are united in that we are all human beings and we are all together on this wonderful, painful, horrible, painful, joyous, exciting and mysterious ride that is being alive," he said.

As he spoke, his co-star Winona Ryder was seen looking confused, seemingly unaware Harbour would deliver those remarks.

Julia Louis-Dreyfus, who won best Female Actor in a Comedy Series for her role in HBO's "Veep," also had a statement against the immigration order.

"This immigrant ban is a blemish, and it's un-American," said Louis-Dreyfus, who added her father was an immigrant to America from Nazi-dominated France.

Star of "The Big Bang Theory" Simon Helberg and his wife, Jocelyn Towne, were clear in their message against the ban.

The Big Bang Theory star Simon Helberg and his wife Jocelyn Towne made a statement at the #SAGAwards: https://t.co/686gfUEuyr pic.twitter.com/nXlSQHzIeK — E! News (@enews) January 30, 2017

A number of other stars voiced their opinions as well, including Mahershala Ali, William H. Macy, Sarah Paulson, Taylor Schilling and Kerry Washington.

Tell us your thoughts on these Hollywood stars using their platform to share their political beliefs.

Gutfeld: 'Trump Is Treating the Presidency Like an Actual Job'

Pirro on Illegal Immigration: 'Law & Order is Back in the West'

VA Gov. McAuliffe Fires Back at Trump Order: 'This Is Not the USA We Know'