A rare genetic deformity that affects an estimated 1 in 10,000 births is known as lobster claw syndrome. But chances are you've never seen anyone who has the condition.

From shows in Austin to Coney Island, he is the ultimate entertainer. "My act comes from my experiences," says Jason Black, known by his stage name as the Black Scorpion.

They're experiences he didn't choose but embraces.

On stage, the black scorpion seems invincible. Off stage, 36-year old Jason Black is struggling with Ectrodactyly Ectodermal Dysplacia -- a rare genetic disorder that causes clefting on the face, hands and feet.

"When you first meet a patient with EEC, the first thing that jumps out are the hands and feet just because they are noticeably different, interestingly that's often not the part that bothers the patient the most," says Dr. Jeffrey Cone, a craneofacial surgeon with St. David's Children's Hospital.

Jason agrees, "I've never been ashamed of my hands, I've always been proud of my hands but my teeth, they always hurt."

The genetic mutation affects the body's ability to create a tooth, so it's primarily missing the enamel. Dr. Cone compares EEC's effect of a person's teeth to Star Wars. He says, "The enamel is basically the shield around the Death Star and so without the enamel the shields are down and the teeth are much more vulnerable to infections and to cavities."

Jason has state health insurance and receives disability benefits but it's not enough. Restoring Jason's teeth will cost nearly $20,000. "I'm disabled but I work every day that I'm allowed to and I earn as much as much money as I'm allowed to," says Jason.

Jason has several jobs, including part-time work at KEYE TV, but the dental work he needs is way beyond his financial reach. "I suggested that he ask for help and that we could do it through gofundme," says his friend Samantha X, who is also a performer.

She says, "Jason is really really special and to have him on stage and to have be able to get his message out to the world, I think is really essential and to not have teeth and not be able to chew it makes it really hard to be able to perform."

So far Jason has raised less than half of what he needs. "I haven't reached that goal and I'm scared I won't because I want to be able to eat again," says Jason.

But he finds comfort knowing people are reaching out to him. "Even though you feel terrible about yourself because you're asking for help and can't chew, just to know that people still love you anyway means something," says Jason.

Through it all, he's hoping sharing his experience will inspire others. "You be you, if you have the heart to be it, you be it. God gave you what he gave you and he gave it to you for a reason and you can prove to people that you're worthy," says Jason.

If you want to find out more about Jason and how you can help, go to https://www.gofundme.com/ectrodactyly.

Follow us on Twitter @keyetv and LIKE us on Facebook for updates.



