Communities

Related Articles

Russia doesn't want peace; Russia wants power Let's start out by discussing some plain truths. First of all, the United States pulling out of the INF treaty, to protect its right to do exactly what Russia has done, is not a threat to world peace. Second, no one is threatening Russia. Shares

Sins of Bush, Obama leave Trump to clean up Iranian mess Hindsight is 20/20, but when you are the commander-in-chief, you can't afford to be wrong. When it comes to Iran, George W. Bush was very wrong, and Barack Obama was very complicit. And now it's left to President Trump to clean up the mess. Shares

Russia is doing the only thing it can do: threaten Today in his annual State of the Nation address, Russian President Vladimir Putin did the only thing he could do in response to the United States pulling out of the Intermediate Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF) -- threaten, as all schoolyard bullies do when facing an existential crisis. The world knows Russia brought this situation upon itself. Shares

Once again, a Balkan tinderbox awaits a spark If you think we have problems here in the U.S., just take a look across the pond. Shares

Iran resistance: 40 Years of perceived U.S. appeasement As the Trump administration tightens the economic screws on Tehran, an interesting event took place at the National Press Club this week in Washington, D.C. The National Council of Resistance of Iran (NCRI) held an event highlighting f40 years of Western governments perceived appeasement of the murderous regime in Iran and the predictable consequences of these actions. Shares

Russiagate hysteria continues to snare innocent victims Today, the Democratic Party pulled out the big guns against a leftist sheep who had left the flock - presidential contender Tulsi Gabbard. Yes, you guessed it, it now seems that this veteran of the Iraq War is a Russian agent, at least if you believe the corrupt legacy media. Shares

AOC and Venezuela's broken promises Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez insists she doesn't want America to be like Venezuela. Shares

U.S. spendthrift ways coming back to haunt us It's comical to hear the screams from Wall Street, the Trump administration and the talking heads freaking out over the recent small rise in short-term interest rates, rightly put in place by the Federal Reserve. Shares

In Ukraine, a football election and alleged intimidation of journalists cause a stink In February, the Union of European Football Associates (UEFA) will hold elections for its executive committee. This year, the poll will be marred by allegations of corruption and intimidation of journalists by one of the candidates from Ukraine. Shares

Why Russia is rushing to prop up disastrous Venezuelan regime The Russian state-run press and Twitter-sphere have been ablaze with indignation over the Trump administration's bold move in Venezuela this week. In case you missed it, the U.S. government and allies across the hemisphere on Wednesday collectively recognized opposition leader Juan Guaido as interim president, in an effort to bring down the disastrous regime of socialist President Nicolas Maduro, a regime which has caused so much misery for the Venezuelan people. Shares

The truth is, Russia is expanding I have written before that I don't believe Russia is the No. 1 threat to American security. On the contrary, a rising China is much more bent on confronting America militarily in the South China Sea or elsewhere, and Iran is bent on developing nuclear weapons to use irresponsibly. Shares

Russia on a mission to keep Iran's mullahs in power Much has been written about the brittle nature of the Iranian regime, which clings to power only through murder, repression and deceit. Shares

Meanwhile in D.C., it's a court case of Saudi versus Saudi With the Jamal Khashoggi affair still etched in recent memory, an interesting trial is making its way through the D.C. court system, civil division. Shares

Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez a Socialist Republican? Our new "I'll take your money honey" in Congress is Socialist superstar Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, who famously wants to give everything away to everyone, and destroy the republic of the United States of America as we know it. She apparently fancies herself to Lincoln (the Republican) and FDR (the Socialist). The dichotomy of that comparison on its face shows idiocy. Shares

It's Orthodox Christmas and people are still dying in Donbass It's Christmas in Eastern Europe, and people are still dying in Donbass, the region controlled by Russian-backed separatists in East Ukraine. Shares

2018: A momentous year for the Iranian resistance 2018 was a momentous year for the Islamic Republic of Iran, and specifically the Iranian Resistance or the People's Mujahadeen of Iran. Shares

U.S. economic resilience spells Chinese model's doom There is a historical truth about the American economy -- it is deep, wide, and resilient. Managed economies, or communism, by contrast, may work for a period of time, due to favorable economic winds. But eventually you have to pay the piper. It's a lesson that China is about to learn the hard way. Shares

China plans to take over the world China is stealing our technology, manipulating its currency, taking advantage of our lenient immigration policies, and practicing unfair trade in order to soon become the largest economy in the world, and the nation in control of the world's resources. Shares

Albania strikes blow against Iran's campaign of terror It may not have been big news in the West, but it's worth noting and praising Albanian Prime Minister Edi Rama's recent decision to expel two Iranian diplomats, including the ambassador, from this tiny Balkan country. The stated reason was for activity "damaging to [Albania's] national security." Shares