The HGST Ultrastar 7K3000 HDD features 7200 RPM, SATA 6Gbps interface and 64MB high speed cache to meet the needs of demanding applications. It delivers unbeatable quality, reliability and availability field proven by top sever and storage OEMs as well as leading Internet giants, resulting in reduced downtime and minimized TOC. It also boasts five Advanced Power Mange modes, ultra low standby power consumption, and halogen-free design, making the Ultrastar 7K3000 an energy-efficient and eco-friendly choice you can purchase and deploy with full confidence.

Delivering Industry-leading Quality and Reliability

When the highest quality and reliability are a top requirement, customer field data proves that the Ultrastar 7K3000 delivers by reducing downtime, eliminating service calls and keeping TCO to a minimum. Engineered for the highest reliability, the Ultrastar 7K3000 is not only put through grueling design tests during development but must also pass stringent ongoing reliability testing during manufacturing. Across the entire Ultrastar family, world-class quality control, combined with scientific root-cause analysis and multi-faceted corrective actions, ensure that HGST remains the recognized leader in quality and reliability for enterprise-class hard drives.

Combining 7200 RPM Performance and Granular Power Control

Operating at 7200 RPM, the HGST Ultrastar 7K3000 offers better overall performance than slower RPM capacity-oriented drives, and does so at impressively low power consumption rates. When compared to HGST’s previous generation Ultrastar A7K2000, the 7K3000 is up to 3 times faster in sustained data transfer rates. The Ultrastar 7K3000 can help data centers achieve lower AC power and HVAC requirements. With five Advanced Power Management modes, the Ultrastar 7K3000 achieves a 59% reduction in watts during low RPM idle mode, and uses less than 1W during standby/sleep modes, freeing up precious headroom for growing enterprise needs.

Innovating for a More Sustainable Environment

The Ultrastar 7K3000 demonstrates HGST ecological leadership with its halogen-free design and power-efficient operation. Both these features serve to qualify the drive for the HGST EcoTrac classification, which identifies products that minimize environmental impact in the areas of product design, manufacturing, operation and disposal.