Update: Trade is now official on July 7, 2016.

Join us in welcoming @yungsmoove21 to the Indiana Pacers! pic.twitter.com/1fsQWicFZI — Indiana Pacers (@Pacers) July 7, 2016

You might want to take shelter if you’re in the Indianapolis area. Woj Bombs have been spotted twice in the last two days: first, the Pacers swap hometown heroes (analysis here), and today the Pacers have acquired Thaddeus Young from the Brooklyn Nets.

Brooklyn has traded forward Thad Young to the Indiana Pacers for the 20th pick and a future 2nd rounder, league sources tell @TheVertical. — Adrian Wojnarowski (@wojespn) June 23, 2016

The Pacers give up their 20th pick in this year’s draft and a future 2nd-round pick. Thad Young will slide immediately into the Pacers starting lineup at the power forward position.

The Pacers will still have plenty of cap room to either resign Jeff Teague to a new deal or pursue one more good free agent. Who knows the Pacers might not be done trading? They could look to move Rodney Stuckey or Monta Ellis on draft night.

Pacers will still have around $15M in cap room, including Ian Mahinmi's cap hold. Should use some to renegotiate/extend Teague. — Zach Lowe (@ZachLowe_NBA) June 23, 2016

Thaddeus Young averaged 15 points and 9 rebounds last year with a 17.5 PER for the Nets.

While the trade won’t be official due to cap reasons until July 1 (same with Teague/Hill deal), Young has already posted about the trade to the Pacers.

Looking forward to new journeys with the @Pacers and the fans. Can't wait to get started. — Thad Young (@yungsmoove21) June 23, 2016

If you want to get excited about the acquisition, just search for Thad Young or Thaddeus Young on Twitter. You’ll find posterizations and smothered chickens all around.

😱😱😱😱 Thad Young highlights are too much fun. https://t.co/iv5KtfrXEE — iPacers.com (@iPacersblog) June 23, 2016

Excited for the smothered chickens that are going to come with Thad Young 👀👀👀 https://t.co/izZYhfwUdT — iPacers.com (@iPacersblog) June 23, 2016

The biggest plus to this trade for the Pacers is that they were not going to get as good of a player as Young in this draft at the 20 spot. Anybody the Pacers were likely to get will probably need a year or two before they are ready to contribute and likely won’t be much more than role players. While this draft was deep, it was deep in role guys, not starters.

Young will immediately become the Pacers best power forward by far. An athletic, long big that runs the floor, plays hard with energy, and will probably be the Pacers best rebounder next year. Another player that will be ideal for the Pacers and Larry Bird’s quest to be a fast-paced, running team.

Thad Young has steadily shot around 56% around the rim & 48% in the post in recent years. Made 38% of jumpers this year too, but few 3s. — Synergy Sports Tech (@SynergySST) June 23, 2016

While Young shoots threes, it’s not something you want him doing too often. He averages 32% from deep in his career and was all the way down to 22% last season. He can do the dirty work down low and make major wow plays while challenging shots at the rim.

Young is a 9-year veteran, but will only be 28 in his 10th season and first with the Pacers. Young hasn’t been on a winning team in a long time, but consistently had a positive net rating on those solid Sixers teams before the Hinkie tank fest.

Thad Young attempted 10.2 shots within 10 feet last year. That's fifth in NBA behind Boogie, Drummond, LeBron, and Greg Monroe. Shot 55%. — Miller Time Podcast // Lance Meme Factory (@MillerTimePod) June 23, 2016

His contract situation is great for the new cap world. Young will be making around $13.5 million for each of the next three years after just finishing the first year of his 4 year, $54 million deal he signed last summer.

While the Pacers will miss that cheap contract that comes with a first-round pick, this is a clear win for the Pacers who get an instant starter with a team-friendly contract for the next 2-3 years. Pacers fans will love Young’s hustle and highlight reel plays.

"This is why everyone loves Thad Young." https://t.co/8NcldyCRkk — iPacers.com (@iPacersblog) June 23, 2016