We know you’re all busy and might miss out on a day (or three) of the exciting things we’re talking about on Xbox Wire every week. If you’ve got a few minutes, we can help remedy that. We’ve pared down all of the week’s news into one easy-to-digest article for all things Xbox! Or, if you’d rather watch than read, you can feast your eyes on our weekly video show above. Either way, be sure to come back every Friday to find out what’s happening This Week on Xbox. Enjoy!

Biggest News of the Week

Windows 10 Creators Update Will Enable Any Gamer to Broadcast

At an event in New York City this week, Microsoft unveiled the Windows 10 Creators Update, a free update coming in early 2017 with a host of new features that empower people to create and share their experiences with others. For gamers, the Windows 10 Creators Update will allow anyone to easily broadcast their gameplay and create their own tournaments on the fastest, most reliable multiplayer network — Xbox Live. Read more.

Xbox One S Bundles for Everyone This Holiday

It’s been an exciting year for Xbox fans and this holiday is the perfect time to get your hands on the top selling console in the U.S. and U.K. the new Xbox One S. It’s the only console with built-in 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray and 4K video streaming including content from partners like Netflix and, coming soon, Amazon Video. In addition, the Xbox One S provides High Dynamic Range (HDR) for supported video and games like Gears of War 4, Forza Horizon 3, NBA 2K17 and Deus Ex: Mankind Divided. Read more.

Feast on November’s Games with Gold Lineup

Games with Gold has four new titles for you to add to your game library for November. As with last month, Xbox One will get two dedicated titles, and two Xbox 360 titles, as well, through Xbox One Backward Compatibility, for a total of four completely free titles thanks to Games with Gold. Read more.

In Case You Missed It

Don’t Miss Out on Our Multiplayer All-access Event

This is a great opportunity for players across both consoles to experience one of the most-popular benefits of Xbox Live Gold membership; when it comes to multiplayer gaming, network reliability is everything. Log in now to play on a network that delivers as well as you do. Read more.

Play Borderlands: The Handsome Collection for Free This Weekend

Borderlands: The Handsome Collection is the essential Borderlands compilation and includes the definitive versions of both Borderlands 2 and Borderlands: The Pre-Sequel, built specifically for next-gen consoles. Experience the absolute highest performance and highest fidelity graphics for any Borderlands game ever played on a video game console. Read more.

Guardians & Gratitude – Halo 5’s First Year

This week marked the one year anniversary of the release of Halo 5: Guardians! We can’t believe how much the game has grown over the first year of play and it’s thanks to you, our fans. You are the reason we do what we do, you challenge and inspire us every day and we love you for it. Read more.

How Watch Dogs 2 Improves on the Original

On November 15, Watch Dogs 2 returns to the always-connected (and extremely hackable) world introduced by Watch Dogs. The basic concept is the same — you’re set loose in a city where absolutely everything is online and lorded over by sinister tech giants — but this is a world that went through a lot of changes after Aiden Pearce rampaged through Chicago’s criminal underworld on a quest for revenge, and all those changes are designed to make Watch Dogs 2 a more fun, flexible experience than its gritty predecessor. Read more.

Halloweek Begins as Spooky Bundle Haunts Consoles!

Minecraft is kicking things off with the launch of the Spooky Bundle for Console Edition today: no tricks here, just three seasonal treats all rolled into one — the Halloween Mash-up, the Halloween Battle Map, and the Campfire Tales Skin Pack. Check out the chilling trailer above and witness a trio of grisly delights, guaranteed to haunt your dreams FOREVER! Read more.

Wailing Heights Brings Undead Adventure to Xbox One

Set in a town populated by folk-singing vegan werewolves, hipster vampire songwriters, and soul-singing zombies, you play as Francis Finklestein, one-time manager of the all-time greatest rock band that Great Britain ever produced: The Deadbeats. As our point ‘n click-inspired adventure begins, Francis is trapped in a Wailing Heights’ holding cell, charged with the crime of “not being dead yet!” Read more.

Xenoraid Delivers Modern Shoot ’em Up Action on Xbox One

Xenoraid‘s creator loved vertical shooters as a kid, but doesn’t care much for the current generation of the bullet hell-type shooters. So, when it came to designing Xenoraid, choosing its goals was easy. Firstly, the game would focus on shooting and have that be as satisfying as possible. Secondly, no memorizing levels or bullet patterns. Thirdly, he wanted a unique setting and a deep metagame to support the action. Read more.