A teacher's aide at Bay View High School was arrested Wednesday, hours after he pushed a student and held him to the floor by the throat. A 17-second video of the attack was shared with WISN 12 NEWS via Facebook at midday Wednesday, about an hour after the incident at the school on the 2700 block of South Lenox Street. The video does not show what led up to the physical altercation, but it shows the 39-year-old aide shoving a student in a red shirt down into a chair and then down to the floor of a classroom.The 14-year-old student can be seen reaching up with his hands when the aide's hand is on the student's neck. The aide is heard asking the student, "What the did I tell you, ?" MPS spokesman Tony Tagliavia called the video "disturbing." VIDEO: MPS responds to video of teacher's aide attacking student "As soon as the school administration was notified of the incident, the Milwaukee Police Department was contacted and the staff member was removed from the classroom," he said. Tagliavia said the aide faces disciplinary action and could be terminated. A Milwaukee Police Department spokesman said the student was taken to a nearby hospital for treatment of minor injuries. The aide was arrested, and the police spokesman said the case would be turned over to the Milwaukee County District Attorney's Office.

A teacher's aide at Bay View High School was arrested Wednesday, hours after he pushed a student and held him to the floor by the throat.

A 17-second video of the attack was shared with WISN 12 NEWS via Facebook at midday Wednesday, about an hour after the incident at the school on the 2700 block of South Lenox Street.

The video does not show what led up to the physical altercation, but it shows the 39-year-old aide shoving a student in a red shirt down into a chair and then down to the floor of a classroom.



The 14-year-old student can be seen reaching up with his hands when the aide's hand is on the student's neck.



The aide is heard asking the student, "What the [expletive] did I tell you, [expletive] [expletive]?"

MPS spokesman Tony Tagliavia called the video "disturbing."

"As soon as the school administration was notified of the incident, the Milwaukee Police Department was contacted and the staff member was removed from the classroom," he said.



Tagliavia said the aide faces disciplinary action and could be terminated.

A Milwaukee Police Department spokesman said the student was taken to a nearby hospital for treatment of minor injuries. The aide was arrested, and the police spokesman said the case would be turned over to the Milwaukee County District Attorney's Office.

AlertMe