Game of Thrones Season 7 Spoilers : Episode 7 Season Finale

The Dragon and The Wolf

Games of Thrones Season 7 Episode 7 will air on August 27th 2017 in the United States, however Game of Thrones Season 7 Episode 7 spoilers are already out. If you are like one of my friends who doesn’t like spoilers please do not read further as we have Game of Thrones Season 7 Spoilers ahead. #winteriscoming #prepareforwinter

Also Read : Game of Thrones Season 8 Episode 1 Leak (Script)

Disclaimer

We are not the original source of the spoilers. These are available freely on the internet. We have just compiled them into one place from various sources. These could be real leaks or just fan theories.

Also Read :

Game of Thrones Season 7 Episode 4 Leak

Game of Thrones Season 7 Spoilers : Episode 5

Game of Thrones Season 7 Spoilers : Episode 6

Game of Thrones Season 7 Spoilers : Random – June 2017

Game of Thrones Season 7 Spoilers : Episode 7 Season Finale

The Dragon and The Wolf

Also Read : Game of Thrones Season 7 Episode 7 Leak (Scripts)

King’s Landing

Pod and Brienne arrive at King’s Landing on horses.

Dany sends her army of the unsullied and Dothraki to King’s Landing in case Cersei has a trap for her and places them outside King’s Landing. Jamie and Bronn oversee King’s Landing defenses, and are impressed with Dany’s army. Tyrion, Jon and others arrive with Dany via ships.

Tyrion, Jon, Jorah, Dany, Davos, Theon, The Hound (who is the one with the wight in a cage) as well as Dany’s Dothraki blood riders are received by Bronn.

Brienne is already there and see’s the Hound, she is surprised to see how he is still alive. They talk about Arya and The Hound tells Brienne to take care

‘The only person needing protecting is the one who gets in her (Arya’s) way’

The Hound smiles and says he doesn’t want to be in her way.

Tyrion and Pod meet each other as well, Podrick still admires Tyrion and tells him that Tyrion is still his lord.

They all arrive at the dragon pit, and it’s a large amphitheater with three large tents. Other lords also start to arrive, and Tyrion feels like it could be a trap and looks around. Cersei arrives with Euron, The Mountain and Qyburn and they sit.

The Hound and The Mountain make eye contact, and The Hound gives that kill you look #cleganebowl.

The Hound then brings the cage that houses the wight to the middle of the amphitheater. Cersei asks Tyrion where Dany is as Dany isn’t present, this is when Dany arrives on top of Drogon and with Rhaegal giving them company. Everyone is amazed, and Cersei wonders where the third dragon is.

Tyrion then explains what the meeting is about.

Theon and Euron see each other, and Euron challenges Theon to rescue his sister Yara.

Jon then tries to explain about wight and Night King and how they need to unite to fight the Army of the Dead. Cersei doesn’t believe him which is when The Hound opens the wight cage and the wight comes out like a wild beast towards Cersei. The Hound has him chained up so it isn’t able to reach her.

Cersei is amazed and afraid, and this is when The Hound starts to demonstrate how a wight cannot be killed by normal weapons. The wight continues to moves even after The Hound hound cuts it up. Jon then yells out that there are only 2 ways to kill a wight, the first fire, so they set fire to one of the wight arms and the arm stops moving. The second is dragon glass, and then Jon uses to stab the wight with a dragon glass weapon and it dies. This is the proof that everyone needed to come together in order to survive the long night.

There is only one war that matters. The Great War, and it is here

Euron pretends to be afraid and asks how many of these creatures are there. Jon Snow says hundreds and thousands of then. Euron asks

well can they swim?

and Jon responds “no” so Euron says

well I’m going back to Pyke

and leaves with his fleet.

Cersei and Dany see the danger together but Cersei says once the long night is over she must still be queen and offers Jon Snow to be the warden of the North. Jon then swears an oath to Dany in front of everyone.

I can only serve one queen and that queen is Daenerys Targaryen

Cersei is shocked, pissed and leaves. She is unwilling to collaborate because she is unwilling to bend the knee to Dany.

Brienne tells Jaime he needs to come with the Lannister Army to fight the White Walkers, to which Jaime replies by complementing her for her loyalty to the Starks. Brienne replies

“fuck loyalty… it’s about survival”.

Jamie has seen all this and believes in the long night and will do all he can to help them.

Now that Tyrion, Dany and Jon have seen Cersei’s negative response it means they won’t have some of the southern armies as support in the North.

Tyrion heads to the Red Keep with The Mountain behind him. Tyrion and Cersei have a conversation on how she blames him for all the Lannister’s have gone through, how he killed their mother and father. Tyrion says there was nothing he could do and that Tywin just wanted him dead so he had to kill him instead. He also tells her that Daenerys wanted to destroy Kings Landing with fire but he stopped her trying to prove he doesn’t want to destroy his own family.

Then Tyrion says if I’m so evil why don’t you order The Mountain to kill me. Cersei doesn’t give a command. Tyrion decides drinks wine and Cersei doesn’t , Tyrion says she is not drinking wine as she is pregnant. Cersei doesn’t respond, but her facial expression gives it away.

Tyrion then heads out with Cersei to meet the rest of the people that were in the dragon pit and Cersei tells them that after speaking to Tyrion she will send troops north to help against the White Walkers.

Tyrion and Dany talk about how Dany tells Jon that she can’t have children, that the dragons are her children, Jon doesn’t care if she can’t have kids.

Game of Thrones Season 7 Spoilers : Episode 7 Season Finale

The Dragon and The Wolf

Winterfell

Little Finger tell Sansa that Arya is dangerous, and she has some evil plans which is why she came back. He also tells her that Arya will use the letter against her somehow.

Dragonstone

Dany and gang are in Dragonstone after their meeting at King’s Landing. Dany is in the war room where they are organizing the defense of the North, where will the Unsullied, Dothraki, North Men, Southerners etc. will go.

Ser Jorah knows a lot about strategies of the Targaryen Kings, and says they need a defensive strategy as they need to defend.

Theon and Jon speak about the Starks and The Greyjoys and how it used to be when they grew up together. Jon asks if he will come with them to the North, Theon says no because he must rescue Yara first, Jon tells him he should and wishes him luck.

Theon tries to rally the remaining Iron Born left in Dragonstone to come with him to rescue Yara. This is when the fight between the leader of those Iron Borne and Theon takes place. They kick him in the balls a few times, but nothing happens to Theon. Theon seems to be losing which is when he gets back into the fight and beats him, they form a rescue party and head out to save Yara.

Winterfell

Sansa gathers all the Northern lords and leaders, and calls on Arya to come forward. Arya is worried as to what is happening, Sansa says it’s time to judge the great treacheries and betrayals that have been done to the North and we will judge the person responsible for them.

She looks straight at Arya, and then says

you need to tell me how many times you have betrayed The North

Arya is shocked and can’t believe her sister is saying this to her, Sansa repeated and says

you need to tell me how many times you have betrayed The North, Lord Baelish

This is when Sansa starts to name all his treacheries:

you killed Alyssa Arryn

Sansa then pulls out the cat’s paw dagger and asks him if he recognizes it, Little Finger says it belonged to Tyrion, but Sansa knew it was his. Next to Sansa is Bran who has told her all these things, who then says

you once told my father ‘I told you not to trust me’

Little Finger is shocked when he hears this. Sansa then tells all the Lords present how he sold her to the Bolton’s. Little Finger realizes he’s pretty much done but still tries to get his way out by telling them lies and asking for help from Yohn Royce and others.

When you brought me back to Winterfell, you told me there’s no justice in the world. Not unless we make it.

In the end Sansa tells Little Finger:

Lord Baelish, thank you for all your lessons

Sansa then nods to Arya, who slits Littlefinger’s throat using the dagger that was intended to kill Bran way back in S01E02. Little Finger starts to choke in his own blood and falls to the ground holding his throat and dies.

After Arya and Sansa finally patch up and reconcile, Arya tells Sansa she’s the strongest woman she has ever met and Sansa tells her that she could have never achieved the things Arya has and they make up.

Game of Thrones Season 7 Spoilers : Episode 7 Season Finale

The Dragon and The Wolf

King’s Landing

Jamie and Cersei have a conversation about the upcoming war. Jamie is looking at a map of the north and starting to gather the Lannister armies to get ready to go north when Cersei asks him what he’s doing to which Jamie says he’s getting ready to go north with the army which Cersei says

nah they have dragons and troops, they can handle it

She says she would be more than happy to see the White Walkers to kill as many of her enemies as possible. She tells him that she has obtained an agreement with Euron. He pretended to be a coward, but instead he is going to Essos to hire the Golden Company on her behalf. The Gold Company is an army of mercenaries Cersei bought as she got a new credit line from the Iron Bank.

Jamie is disgusted by Cersei and they continue to argue. The argument gets heated up and we see The Mountain draw his sword in case things between Jamie and Cersei get ugly. Jamie is pissed and leaves Cersei (fucking finally) we see Jamie leaving the city (not in his Lannister uniform) and on his way out. He stops to fix his golden hand and looks back at the Red Keep which is when the first snowflakes begin to fall on Kings Landing.

Winterfell – Boatsex and R+L = J

Bran is visited by Sam who Bran recognizes, asks what he is doing there and Sam tells him he needs to see Jon Snow. Bran says he also needs to tell Jon Snow a lot, Sam asks Bran what he needs to tell Jon Snow. Bran says that Jon isn’t Ned’s bastard but Lyanna’s and Rhaegar’s son and that he was born in dorne and that his name isn’t Jon Snow but Jon Sand. But Sam tells Bran that he is not a Sand, and that he has seen it in record that Raeghar had his marriage with Elia annulled and married Lyanna which shocks Bran. Sam then tells Bran that if he can see into the future and past that he should go see for himself. Bran then goes into the past and sees the wedding between Raeghar and Lyanna in a forest, as he sees this he realizes that Roberts rebellion was all based on a lie because Robert was pissed and said that Lyanna was kidnapped.

While this flashback is happening, scenes switch back and forth between Raeghar with Lyanna and Jon and Dany on the boat. As the romantic scene between Raeghar and Lyanna happens we see Jon and Dany’s romantic scene as well. Jon and Dany enter a cabin together, in which they begins to take each others clothes off. #boatsex

Tyrion is the only one who notices that they are having sex, as boatsex intensifies we see the scene where Lyanna is in Tower of Joy where she tells Ned that the baby’s name is Aegon Targaryen. Bran then says Aegon Targaryen is the legitimate heir to the iron throne. R + L = J

The Wall

We see these events through the eyes of Bran who wargs into a bunch of crows and we are brought to East Watch By the Sea, where Tormund and Beric are. The army of the dead with the blizzard following them like in episode one outside The Wall. Tormund and Beric are shocked as they see this, and then the Night King flies in on Viserion. Viserion and the Night King attack the wall , they focus on one part of the wall and melt it. The wall starts to break in a “V” shape. The gap in The Wall is wide enough for the dead to go through, and the Night King fly’s through the wall riding Viserion. Tormund and Beric run for safety.

That’s it for Game of Thrones Season 7 Spoilers peeps, see you next year.

Source – The peeps over at /r/freefolk who don’t bend \m/