Tom Dahlin/Getty Images

The Cleveland Browns host their first game of the new season facing the first overall draft pick Sam Bradford and his St. Louis Rams. As training camp comes to a close the preseason games are still on full throttle, so this should be a good one.

The Browns offense, and new starting quarterback Jake Delhomme, impressed in their first game at Green Bay last week. Coaches and fans will look for them to keep up that pace along with improvements on the defensive side.

The things the coaches will be watching for most in the second preseason game will be the continued development of defensive rookies Joe Haden and TJ Ward. Also they will keep an eye on an offensive line dealing with injuries and how Marcus Benard looks in the starting lineup.

Starting with the latter, the linebacker corps of this years team has been the center of most peoples attention in training camp. With an injury to starter and team leader D'Qwell Jackson, Browns coaches are shuffling around bodies to try to find the best fit.

The starters for tomorrow's preseason showdown will go as follows: Marcus Benard and Matt Roth on the outside and newcomers Scott Fujita and Chris Gocong starting as the middle linebackers.

Marcus Benard, who was an undrafted free agent signee last season, spent most of his rookie year on the practice squad. He burst onto the radar when he was activated in a home win over the Pittsburgh Steelers in which he had 2 sacks of Steelers quarterback Ben Roetheislberger.

As the season continued Benard showed he could be used as a pass rusher in the NFL, but to be a starter in Mangini's defense you can't afford to be just a specialist. On Saturday, Benard will try to show everyone he can be a complete player and deserves to start.

In their first action in a NFL uniform rookies TJ Ward and Joe Haden impressed the coaches. TJ Ward led the team in tackles and showed potential to be the safety this team has been searching for years. Cornerback Joe Haden got the start in place of injured Eric Wright and looked nervous but played better as the game went on.

For the rookies to keep impressing Ward will have to show improvement in coverage and Haden will have to lose the nerves early, especially since he's fighting for a starting spot.

The right side of the offensive line has been a mystery ever since tackle Ryan Tucker was injured a few years ago. Projected starters for the start of the season were Floyd Womack and Tony Pashos. Womack got hurt early preseason and wont be back until the season starts. Rookie draft pick Shawn Lauvao played well in his absence but has left the team for an unknown personal reason. At tackle Pashos has shown an inability to stay healthy for more then a couple of days but may be available for this weekends game.

With options warring down it will be interesting to see how they perform. Although it's just a preseason game for a rebuilding team such as the Browns these games still have importance. And it will be important to see how these things shake out.