Today we bring you a BONUS behind the scenes clip from our "Friday the 13th The Game The Movie" video. It's a real treasure for all as we relive the moment where we destroyed a super expensive piece of equipment like morons! Wow! Incredible filmmaking! We're so proud of ourselves! Click over to YouTube and watch this remarkable piece of film school material!

As we mentioned before, this Sunday, we're gonna have an extra long stream (starting at 2PM Pacific). We're gonna go all day until 7PM when we do the Mega64 Podcast LIVE to wrap it up. We mentioned we may announce a couple things about Mega64's future, and we want to be upfront about that as possible (in the most vague way possible as well). We want to change how we conduct Mega64. Not change what it is, but change how we do it. We've been doing it the way we've been doing it for over a decade, and it's been super rad. No complaints. But we're also always thirsty to try new things and experiment. With your support, we've been able to do more of that and less having to answer to anybody to make it happen. We couldn't be more grateful. But we're often asked when we're going to take things to the next level, and we want to give every option for people to help make that possible. This weekend, on our live stream, we'll be debuting our first attempt into the crowdfunding arena. There's gonna be goals and fun events every hour, telethon style. It's gonna be a blast, and potentially a really interesting step in a bigger direction for Mega64. But the important thing is, like anything we do, it's your call if you want to support it. We're not going anywhere, and nothing you love is at risk. It's just yet another option for people who will want to see something different from Mega64. People have asked us for this for a long time, and we're bringing it to you in the most fun way we can. We hope you'll join us on Sunday at 2PM Pacific to see what we're cooking up! You can watch the stream here on our front page, or over at our Twitch page. See you this weekend!