After an up-and-down rookie year, Landon Collins has the potential to become a great player for the Giants.

At this point, saying the New York Giants were bad on defense in 2015 is a bit of a broken record. The unit finished dead last in the league, and the passing defense was abundantly poor at times.

As an individual, Collins was a bit of a paradox during year 1.

Collins’ first year was up-and-down, but he improved as the year wore on. Things started out rough, as he called out Dallas Cowboys’ quarterback Tony Romo prior to the two teams’ week 1 meeting. Collins was beat for a touchdown that game.

Collins’ growing pains continued in week 2, when he forgot to touch down Atlanta receiver Leonard Hankerson. The climax of Collins’ first year came when he dropped an easy interception that would’ve ended the game against the New England Patriots.

From that point on, Collins’ play improved as he got better at doing what he was supposed to do, as well as making plays in general. Although he wasn’t always in the perfect position, Collins always played with 100 percent. He ended up starting every single game for the Giants, which is an incredibly impressive feat.

Entering his second year, Collins has a chance to emulate center Weston Richburg‘s sophomore season.

I admit, saying Collins could be this year’s Weston Richburg is a bit of an odd thing to say, especially since Richburg is an offensive lineman. So let me explain, first by examining Richburg’s forgettable first year.

During his rookie year in 2014, Richburg, whose natural position is center, played out of position at guard. He appeared in all 16 games, and started 15. Playing next to ineffective, journeyman center J.D. Walton, Richburg struggled immensely.

But after Walton left town and Richburg was promoted back to center, the latter began to produce. Last year, Richburg emerged as arguably one of the league’s top-three centers, and he was snubbed of a Pro Bowl ballot. To his credit, however, Richburg was named to Pro Football Focus’ Pro Bowl roster.

Now, Richburg has developed into the leader of the offensive line, even calling out some of his teammates.

So how is Collins like Richburg?

Well, like the fiery center, Collins played out of position during his rookie year, but was an immediate starter. He struggled, but I mean, can be really blame him for it? Collins was essentially thrown into the fire from day 1, given an old fire extinguisher and was told, “Here. Good luck.”

Collins is a strong safety by nature, but because of injuries to three safeties, he was forced into the free safety position. To nobody’s surprise, Collins struggled mightily in pass coverage, though he led the team in tackles. In the same vein Richburg played next to an ineffective veteran, Collins played aside hard-hitting, poor covering Brandon Meriweather.

Now, with the returns of the three injured safeties and the drafting of Darian Thompson, Collins projects to slide back to his natural position of strong safety. That bodes will for all parties involved, as Collins will be back in his comfort zone, and defensive coordinator Steve Spagnuolo will be able to utilize Collins fully in certain packages.

Basically, because of offseason moves, Collins, like Richburg before him, is going to be able to slide back to his natural position, after spending a year learning about the trials and tribulations that accompany an NFL career.

Collins has a real shot to make an impact similar to the one Richburg made last year, too. For starters, has the physical build and abilities to become an impact starter for the Giants.

Furthermore, Collins has the intensity and drive to succeed, and he plays with energy and intensity. Going off the film from last year, Collins is a natural fit at the strong safety position, though still a bit of a liability in pass coverage. He can come down and be an immediate difference-maker in the run game, and he hits and is built like a linebacker.

Last year, Spags used Collins as a free rusher in some packages, and Collins did a sufficient job applying pressure on the quarterback.

So from a physical standpoint, Collins has everything a player could want.

Collins has the proper mentality, too, as has the discipline to become great. Strong character and discipline are two traits that seemingly follow every Nick Saban-coached player to the NFL.

Collins is a coachable young man who works hard and never gives up on a play. He has a chance to become the vocal and emotional leader of a safety unit that is sorely lacking one. He’s the alpha male of the safety group, and he has a natural leadership quality about him that can’t be taught. His drop against the Patriots was a good test of Collins’ mental game, and he passed with flying colors.

It would have been easy for Collins to — as Antrel Rolle once eloquently put it — “get in the tank,” but instead, he manned up and improved every week on.

While saying a safety should try to emulate a center is a bit odd, Collins has a serious chance to see a career surge similar to Richburg’s. Although it’s certainly a stretch, as everything during the offseason and preseason seems to be, Collins very well may play at a Pro Bowl level in his second season.