The Boston Red Sox are giving fans an opportunity to taste baseball long before the 2015 season begins.

The Red Sox will host a “Baseball Winter Weekend” at Foxwoods Resort Casino in Mashantucket, Conn., on Jan. 23-25.

The event will include a Town Hall Meeting with Red Sox leaders, autographs with Red Sox players and roundtable discussions on a variety of baseball topics. It also will include a full baseball festival for fans of all ages and clinics for kids.

The entire Red Sox roster, including coaches, has been invited to attend. Red Sox alumni and Wally the Green Monster also will be in attendance.

The weekend will begin Friday, Jan. 23 with the introduction of the participating players, followed by a fan-interactive Town Hall Meeting with Red Sox principal owner John Henry, chairman Tom Werner, president/CEO Larry Lucchino, general manager Ben Cherington and manager John Farrell.

Fans will have an opportunity Saturday, Jan. 24 to meet players and receive autographs, take photographs with the three World Series trophies and see Red Sox artifacts.

“Baseball Winter Weekend” will conclude Sunday, Jan. 25 with a series of baseball clinics on hitting, pitching, baserunning and coaching conducted by Red Sox coaches and alumni.

“We look for innovative ways to foster player-fan interaction,” Lucchino said via a press release. “Having a convention of Red Sox Nation families, together with our players of today and yesterday, is an appealing concept. With pitchers and catchers scheduled to report to spring training just a few weeks later, it’s also a warm way on a winter weekend to look forward to the upcoming baseball season.”

Tickets and weekend packages, including the option for discounted hotel accommodations, are available at RedSox.com/WinterWeekend.

A pass for all three days is $50 per adult and $10 for children 14 and under. Toddlers under 3 are free. A one-day pass for Saturday — when the bulk of the activities are scheduled — is $40 per adult and $10 for children. (Season ticket holders’ prices are reduced by $10, and their children’s price for the three-day pass is $8.)

Thumbnail photo via Charles Krup/The Associated Press