Project Noah (Nationwide Operational Assessment of Hazards) may be expiring in February but the weather bureau will adopt it and will also be institutionalized in other government agencies involved in disaster risk reduction and management, according to the Department of Science and Technology (DOST).

In a statement on Monday, Science Secretary Fortunato de la Peña also said proponents of Project Noah could submit another project proposal in a related area, which would undergo evaluation and consideration for funding.

ADVERTISEMENT

“It has to be understood that research projects have start and end dates. In this particular project, the promised deliverables have been met and are now ready for adoption and use,” said De la Peña.

He explained that Project Noah was one of the research and development initiatives funded by the DOST.

The state-run flood and rain forecasting system was launched in 2011 under its disaster risk reduction program following Tropical Storm “Sendong,” which killed hundreds of residents in northern Mindanao.

Most of its component projects were completed in 2015 but it was extended last year “to cover additional targets and deliverables,” said the DOST chief.

De la Peña had to make a clarification on the status of Project Noah after its executive director Mahar Lagmay revealed on Twitter that the government was shutting down the project due to lack of funds and support.

Lagmay claimed that Project Noah was undermined under the previous administration “and they are still doing the same” under the new administration.

De la Peña explained that the project was given an extension until the end of February this year with a condition that the technologies that would be used to continue its operations would be transferred to the government agencies that had the relevant mandate.

The Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration (Pagasa) had been identified as the principal government agency that would take over the operations of the delivered outputs or technologies of Project Noah, he said.

“The outcomes or result of Project Noah is now due for use and adoption, specifically by Pagasa. Its adoption ensures the Noah tools to be institutionalized,” he said.

ADVERTISEMENT

He also noted that the details of the turnover had already been discussed by DOST and Pagasa officials with Lagmay late last year.

But he said that if the researcher had a new project proposal similar to Project Noah, “it can be submitted, evaluated and considered for funding.”

Read Next

LATEST STORIES

MOST READ