In the first half, former Police Chaplain Russ Dizdar discussed cases of satanic ritual abuse, as well as demons and possession. A variety of Satanism is being practiced in the United States, including a group that recently unveiled a large bronze statue of Baphomet in Detroit, which he associates more with a political agenda than a religious one. Regarding the criminal side of ritual abuse, Dizdar said that many of these events correspond with Satanic holidays (July 27th, for instance is known as the 'Grand Climax'). These rituals, he said, can involve infliction of human pain, bloodletting, and animal sacrifice with the goal of raising the energy, and creating a demonic frenzy. Satanic abuse can be connected with secret government projects like MK-Ultra, he indicated.

Sometimes victims are kidnapped or abducted for the rituals, and their suffering is prolonged as a way to attract more powerful demons, he continued. In cases of possession, Dizdar noted that the demon can take many forms in order to deceive the person into accepting them into their lives. The demonic hierarchy, he added, have an organized agenda, and are "moving the world, politically, and economically." He also talked about the demonic in music and literature, suggesting that demons may guide writers toward certain lyrics and ideas.

--------------------------

In the latter half, physicist and UFO researcher Stanton Friedman talked about various UFO-related topics including scientific evidence, MUFON, how he got involved in investigating the Roswell incident, and the Betty and Barney Hill abduction case. He recently spoke at the 25th annual Roswell UFO Festival, and noted they had record attendance this year. In 1978, he first began his investigation of the Roswell incident, tracking down Maj. Jesse Marcel, who handled the UFO wreckage in 1947. Marcel had been an intelligence officer for an atomic bomb division of the Army stationed at the Roswell AFB, and was a highly credible witness, Friedman cited.

One of the interesting things about the Betty Hill case was the star map she created under post hypnotic suggestion, based on what she allegedly saw in the ET vehicle. Marjorie Fish, an amateur astronomer, met with Hill and interpreted her map as showing the Zeta Reticuli star system. Friedman recalled how Astronomy magazine ran a controversial article in 1974 by Terence Dickinson about the star map. What's interesting nowadays, Friedman pointed out, is that projects like the Kepler space telescope are revealing thousands of exoplanets, which makes the notion that the Zeta Reticuli system had its own planets far more probable.

News segment guests: John M. Curtis, Charles R. Smith