For my trip around the Mediterranean, I’m asking readers to plan a fun-filled, smartly-themed, low-budget five-day trip to somewhere on the Italian coast. It’s up to you to come up with a destination and associated theme. A multiday hike through gorgeous countryside and small towns? A lesser-known side of a much-visited tourist destination? Sampling the seafood specialties along a string of coastal villages? Anything goes, as long as you can get me there from Naples (where I’ll be the week before) and keep the budget light.

The Frugal Traveler’s Mediterranean Trip Follow me on Facebook or on Twitter.

There’s no need to have been to Italy yourself to plan an itinerary – I rarely find myself planning trips to places I’ve already been. The Internet has endless travel planning tools, and you’re free to use them all, as well as whatever Facebook, Twitter or other social networking resources you can engage. On the other hand, if you’re reading this in Italy and want to use first-hand knowledge, that’s fine too. Just note: the itinerary should be replicable by other travelers, so suggestions to “stop by my grandmother’s for dinner” won’t work (unless your grandmother runs a restaurant).

The budget:

I’m not going to set an exact limit, but needless to say, the cheaper the better. Meals over 15 euros ($21) and lodging over 70 euros ($100) a night are strongly discouraged; anything much, much cheaper is strongly encouraged. A rental car is acceptable only if getting around by bus or train or bike or foot is utterly unfeasible.

The itinerary:

The trip must start in Naples on a Wednesday, run through Sunday and end somewhere with public transportation. The format is flexible, but should have an introduction, and a day-by-day outline with details on transportation, meals, lodging and activities/attractions whenever possible. Please give pricing details wherever you can, and include Web links and/or phone numbers wherever possible. Also, estimate the total cost of the trip.

The logistics:

Your itinerary can be sent in the body of an e-mail or as a Word attachment — with links to relevant Web sites wherever possible but NO PHOTOS — to frugaltraveler@nytimes.com by noon eastern time on Friday, June 3, 2011. Please include “Frugal Italy” in the subject line.

Disclosure:

If you have a commercial or financial interest in any of the places you are recommending, let me know.

Tips:

1) I eat anything and sleep anywhere, as long as it is not hazardous to my short-term health. (Occasional dangers to long-term health, like eating fried food and incurring a sleep deficit by being awakened by roosters at 5 a.m., are permissible.) Like any sane person over the age of 25, however, I prefer private rooms to shared dorms, when possible.

2) Not all specifics need to be spelled out for each day. For example “choose one of the low-budget restaurants around xxxx church” is just fine.

3) Off the beaten path is great, but alternative ways to experience mainstream destinations on a limited budget can be just as good.

4) Have fun, and have me have fun.

Prize: Absolutely nothing, except your name in the column and lunch on me whenever our geographic paths next cross.