1k

SO EASY AND SO GOOD! I made a few modifications: Using a 7.25lb Bone-in Turkey Breast I layered the bottom of my crockpot with 3 cut-up celery stalks, one sweet yellow onion, 1/4 cup chicken b...

Help!! I was so excited to try this. Is the problem with slow cookers that do or do not have a heating element on the sides? How could I go wrong w/just a turkey breast and dry onion? I'm still ...



LadaFun 371 28

SO EASY AND SO GOOD! I made a few modifications: Using a 7.25lb Bone-in Turkey Breast I layered the bottom of my crockpot with 3 cut-up celery stalks, one sweet yellow onion, 1/4 cup chicken b... Read more



Joyce 115 40

Excellent!! I made this tonight on a whim. I was going to grill our 6.5 lb turkey breast, but thought I'd give this a try. The only thing I really did differently was smear a couple of pats of... Read more



Butterfly Flutterby 888 1k

I like to put just enough water to cover the bottom of the crockpot. Place the turkey in, surround it with quartered onions and carrots, brush the bird with melted butter and then season it well... Read more



S. N. 591 9

This was so easy and came out absolutely delish! I think I'll make this regularly to have turkey for sandwiches during the week -- way better than cold cuts and you don't have to do the whole Th... Read more



COASTALSUM 187 10

This is wonderful! I did not know you could cook turkey breast in a slow cooker like this. If you're like me, you'll probably be tempted to add stock or liquid to the meat -- DON'T! Believe m... Read more



Sally 247 166

Moist and very tasty. I will be cooking many more turkey breasts in my slow cooker. It is August and it is too hot to cook. This is another good recipe that doesn't heat up the kitchen. I co... Read more



Indy Nurse 0 6

This was my first turkey I've ever made and it turned out great. I am cooking for two so I used a 3 lb boneless turkey breast. I forgot to buy the dry onion soup mix so I spinkled onion powder a... Read more



K.A. 99 23

This recipe was a lifesaver for me! I'm living on an island outside the US and had to drive 40 miles just to buy a frozen turkey breast, expecting to roast it in the oven for guests Thanksgiving... Read more