When Dr. Benjamin Carson lit up Barack Obama over his landmark health-care legislation at last month’s National Prayer Breakfast, it appears he was … holding back.

Not so in his speech today at the Conservative Political Action Conference.

Watch CPAC live, right here!

“I’m want to talk a little bit about what’s logical and what’s common sense today, because we don’t hear a lot of that,” began Carson director of pediatric neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins Hospital. “Liberals and everybody else should understand and enjoy common sense also. For some strange reason, sometimes they don’t.”

Among his “common sense” barbs: Members of Congress ought to remember they work for the people, not all black people think alike, nor should they be expected to, and the current policies and tactics of Obama and his allies are working to “destroy this country.”

“Let’s say somebody were [in the White House] and they wanted to destroy this nation,” Carson posited. “I would create division among the people, encourage a culture of ridicule for basic morality and the principles that made and sustained the country, undermine the financial stability of the nation, and weaken and destroy the military.

“It appears, coincidentally, that those are the very things that are happening right now,” Carson concluded.

The solution to this path of destruction, he suggested earlier in the speech, is an informed and active population willing to hold rogue government officials’ “feet to the fire.”

“Congress has a nine-percent approval rating, and yet we returned people at a rate of 90 percent to Congress. Now what does that tell you?” Carson asked. “What I’m saying to people, to the people of America today, is that we are responsible. This is a country that’s ‘for, of and by the people,’ not for, of and by the government, and if we turn it over to them, we cannot complain about what they’re doing. … We have to hold their feet to the fire.”

Dr. Carson’s full comments can be seen in the video above.

Watch the rest of CPAC live, right here!

Who is your pick for president in 2016? Allen West

Barack Obama

Ben Carson

Bobby Jindal

Donald Trump

Hillary Clinton

Joe Biden

Marco Rubio

Martin O'Malley

Michele Bachmann

Michelle Obama

Mitt Romney

Nancy Pelosi

Newt Gingrich

Paul Ryan

Rand Paul

Rick Perry

Rick Santorum

Rob Portman

Sarah Palin

Ted Cruz

Wayne LaPierre

Other View Results