A gay couple on Wednesday filed a federal lawsuit challenging Michigan's refusal to recognize their out-of-state marriage.

Bruce T. Morgan and Brian P. Merucci, who married in New York last year, argue that a separate ruling currently on hold striking down Michigan's ban on gay marriage means the state must recognize their nuptials.

The Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals in Cincinnati stayed the lower court's order in March after roughly 300 gay and lesbian couples exchanged vows in Michigan.

Republican Governor Rick Snyder declared the marriages valid but refused to recognize them pending an appeal.

Morgan and Merucci say Snyder failed to address the marriages of gay couples performed elsewhere.

Stephanie D. Myott, the couple's attorney, told MLive.com that “Snyder only addressed the couples who married in Michigan after the DeBoer ruling.”

“No one is talking about the thousands of couples in Michigan who were married in another state, like Bruce and Brian. The Constitution protects their fundamental rights as well,” she said.

“Unlike the same-sex marriages performed in Michigan on Mach 22, 2014, the legality of Bruce and Brian's marriage is in no way dependent upon the decision in the Sixth Circuit appeal,” the couple's complaint states. “Bruce and Brian's marriage was legal when performed in New York. When judge Friedman found the Marriage Amendment and its implementing statutes unconstitutional, Section 2 of DOMA no longer allowed Michigan to deny Bruce and Brian their state marital rights and benefits, which were vested in them pursuant to the Full Faith and Credit Clause. Even if the Sixth Circuit overturns Judge Friedman's decision, Bruce and Brian's state marital rights and benefits are vested in them and cannot be taken away.”

Morgan, who is battling a 2011 diagnosis of inoperable brain cancer, said he wanted the marriage recognized so that hospital staff will recognize “the decisions [Merucci] makes regarding my care.”

“I know that Brian will be by my side during this difficult time, and I want him to be recognized as my spouse when he does because that is who is he is,” Morgan said.