Ciaran appeared in many stage productions with prestigious companies such as the Royal Shakespeare Company and has gone on to star in films such as The Road to Perdition and Tomb Raider, and TV dramas such as Persuasion and the upcoming Rome.

What's he been in?

Ciaran stars alongside top names such as Kevin McKidd, James Purefoy and Polly Walker in the major drama Rome. He plays Julius Caesar.

His early career was spent on stage. After a long stint with the Glasgow Citizen's Theatre, he went on to perform in various theatres in both London and Ireland. He appeared in many productions for The Royal Shakespeare Company and The National Theatre and was in the original cast for Patrick Marber's hit play Closer.

One of Ciaran's first screen roles was in Excalibur, the hugely successful telling of the King Arthur legend. The film also starred Helen Mirren and Cherie Lunghi and launched the careers of fellow Irishmen, Liam Neeson and Gabriel Byrne.

During this time he also appeared in a number of dramas on TV. These included Seaforth, Prime Suspect and he played Brian Keenan alongside Colin Firth as John McCarthy in Hostages, a fictionalised account of real events in Lebanon in the 1980s. He also played a dashing Jane Austen hero when he appeared as Captain Wentworth in an acclaimed adaptation of Persuasion with Amanda Root.

His career continued with roles in many major films such as playing the baddie in the second Lara Croft, Tomb Raider film; Husband to Helen Mirren's character in the nude WI ladies film, Calendar Girls and as the subject of a hit in The Road To Perdition.

Ciaran also appeared in the big-screen version of the 1980's cop show Miami Vice. Colin Farrell and Jamie Foxx play Crocket and Tubbs. He has also recently worked on a major new historical drama with Steven Spielberg.

Did you know?

Ciaran originally started studying law, before leaving university to take up a place at RADA.

His first acting job was as the back end of a pantomime horse.

Personal Details

Ciaran is married and has daughter

He was born in Belfast in 1953.