Cricket legend Shane Warne has undertaken an unlikely venture - saving Tasty Toobs from discontinuation.

Warne shared his surprising love of the Smith's Snackfoods chip-like snack on social media saying he and son Jackson were 'shattered,' and urged the company to make contact as he had a mysterious 'plan.'

'This can't be true, my son @jackson_warne18 and I are shattered, Smiths please contact me asap, as I have a plan...' he shared on Sunday.

Cricket legend, Shane Warne attempts to save the discontinuation of Tasty Toobs by posting on social media

Bags of Tasty Toobs before production of the snack was stopped

Smith's pulled the pin on the 'tasty saucy bite-sized snack,' after lack of consumer demand left the company struggling to continue their production.

The news was discovered after one consumer contacted Smith's to ask why he could not find his favourite snack on the shelf anymore.

After receiving a grim reply from Karen Mackay from the Consumer Information Centre on Friday, fans of the junk food declared their outrage on social media.

Twetting, Shane Warne says the snacks are favourite of his and his sons

Shane Warne says he has a plan to help continue the production of Tasty Toobs

Facebook user Russell Hayter broke the news of the end of Tasty Toobs

Toobs fans had been noticing the disappearance of their favourite snack from store shelves over the past several months

Since the news broke, fans have taken to social media to express outrage, both mock and real

Some Tasty Toobs fans across Australia had noticed that their favourite snack had begun disappearing from stores and were wondering why.

Now they have an answer, and they don't seem to be happy.

Since the news broke, fans have taken to social media to express outrage, both mock and real.

It was Russell Hayter, of Sydney, who discovered the tubular-shaped potato snack was done and alerted the public, Good Food reported.

This is not the first time Tasty Toobs have been removed from the market.

Smiths pulled the product in 2001 before relaunching the snack in 2007.

An image shows what the potato based, tomato flavoured snack looked like