As of late, the WWE has begun to air programs that pull the curtain back on the current product, breaking kayfabe on the Network with current stars, as a way to drive up ratings.

In 1989,Vince McMahon famously began to call his company sports-entertainment as a way to avoid required fighting licenses and taxes in each state, much in the way boxing and mixed-martial arts are regulated. Previously, wrestling’s fixed match results had been an industry secret, so much so that wrestlers who traveled together had to be mindful of being seen by fans, as to continue to keep their “hatred” for each other real. In one particular instance, Hacksaw Jim Duggan and the Iron Sheik made headlines across legitimate news outlets when they were pulled over during a traffic stop in 1987 and were found guilty of possessing marijuana and cocaine. One reason this story received so much attention was that people were shocked to hear that the supposed patriot Duggan was actually friends with the Iranian scourge, the Iron Sheik. However, the times have changed.

The WWE periodically releases documentary style retrospectives about the wrestlers, as well as periods of wrestling history. During these, fans become privy to the real life goings on that occured in the life of the wrestler or the events discussed. In the past, we have found out why Shawn Michaels lost his smile, as well as how the idea for Wrestlemania began. But with the Network, we are finally getting a glimpse into the current product. Shows such as Table for 3 and Breaking Ground have allowed us to peek behind the curtain in real-time. Although these ideas were not available at the launch of the Network, it seems someone has finally realized the potential opportunity to draw in more subscribers by moving away from dwelling on the past, such as Monday Night Wars, and instead letting us see wrestlers be real people.

Breaking Ground is a behind the scenes look at talents like Baron Corbin and Baley working their ways through WWE developmental. Narrated by William Shatner, a documentary veteran, this series shows us the relationship between trainers such as Norman Smiley and others who cut their teeth in small independent promotions and the nascent stars of today. The NXTers learn the humbling work of building rings and setting up venues, a bygone art that their trainers are trying to impart to them. Although Total Divas has been a view into the lives of the female wrestlers, it does so by building drama with what seems to be scripted material, this Breaking Ground documentary is rife with real raw emotion, something that is refreshing in this reality era phoniness that pervades entertainment and pop culture.

Table for 3 is another fantastic program being produced by the WWE Network. The premise is that three wrestlers sit around a table for lunch or dinner and just talk about their shared stories from the road and observations about anything else they choose to discuss. Recent episodes have had predictable pairings like the New Day, but have also featured odd trios like R-Truth, Miz and Curtis Axel as well as the random triumvirate of Neville, Bo Dallas and Samoa Joe. The episodes generally ran just under 25 minutes, which is a blessing and a curse: the program seems to end abruptly at times, but the entirety of the program is edited to be entertaining.

The WWE finally seems to be “getting it” in terms of programming. The curtain has been pulled years ago and there is no reason not to use that to attract more viewers. Most wrestling fans above the age of 12 know that wrestling match results are fixed, but that doesn’t deter them from watching the product. Instead of insulting our intelligence, continue to provide meaningful programs for my 9.99.

Main Photo: