Last Saturday we revealed the Top 10 Best-Dressed Men of Windsor and Essex County nominated by our readers and chosen by our esteemed panel of judges. This week we’re revealing the Top 10-Best-Dressed Women.

Just like the men, it was difficult to make our final selection based on our loosely structured criteria. Quirky, chic, avant garde, classic … It didn’t matter what kind of style our winners had. It only mattered that they owned it.

To recap the rules: The identity of our judges was kept a closely guarded secret, because in this tight-knit community, everyone knows everyone. You sent in your entries, we went through them, and if there was a chance someone turned out to be a friend or relative, we politely excused ourselves from the vote.

Our judges were picked because of their own personal style and fashion expertise. I got to be head judge, because it’s my contest. Ari Freed, co-owner of Freeds and the most impeccable dresser I know, agreed to join the team. So did the stylish Anne Waters, president and CEO of Anne’s on the Avenue and the glamorous Houida Kassem of Houida and Friends on Cogeco 11.

For this shoot, Anne Waters was wearing a wrap-tie top in a blue museum print with matching pants by Rock N Karma. It was designed in Toronto, and it’s available at Anne’s on the Avenue. The blue patent shoes are by Nine West.

Anne’s philosophy of fashion is this: She believes a woman’s wardrobe is the outward expression of how she sees herself. “A great wardrobe can empower her, make her feel beautiful, reflect her self-image and bolster her self-esteem,” she says. Anne’s been helping women do that for more than 25 years, first on Ouellette Avenue and now at her Manning Road boutique.

Ari Freed was wearing a 100 per cent linen jacket made to measure in Canada by Coppley for our shoot. The pant is also by Coppley, made in a wrinkle-resistant wool and Lycra stretch fabric by Scabal. The dress shirt is by Eton, the tie from Canali. Ari’s colourful socks are from Bugatchi, and his Mezlan dress shoes were handmade in Spain of natural linen and burnished calfskin. It’s all available at Freeds of Windsor, of course.

Houida Kassem isn’t a fashion retailer, but she definitely has an eye for fashion. She calls her style “all over the map. I don’t favour one designer over another, as it’s more about a look than a label on an outfit. I do, however, love my 7 For All Mankind jeans simply because they make my butt look smaller.”

Houida shops locally and if something makes her feel and look good “it’s found a new home in my closet and it’s a best friend for life . . . or at least a season.”

Some of the following winners are names you’d expect to see on a best-dressed list. Others will surprise you.

Here, in alphabetical order, are the females nominated by our readers and selected by our judges as the Top 10 Best-Dressed Women in Windsor and Essex County:

Zita Bobbie, Diane Bertolin, Sophia Chisholm, Kim Dendiuk, Christina Fanelli, Maria Farah, Melanie Gardin, Jasmine Jasey, Doris Lapico, Diane Saba.

Zita Bobbie has been considered one of Windsor’s most beautiful women since she began modelling as a teenager. Ralph Lauren is her favourite designer, and she was wearing one of his tunics for our shoot, along with leggings by HUE. Zita’s hat and wedges were by Aldo. Her style is eclectic and elegant, and she favours a turquoise/western vibe. Married to David Zultek, she loves to fish and boat and volunteers with WETRA. Zita’s brother Brian, by the way, was named one of the Top 10 Best-Dressed Men last week. Must be those good genes.

Diane Bertolin is the owner of The Collective Publishing Company Inc. In her business, she says “it’s all about presentation. I work primarily with creative people who are in the fashion industry, so the style I present is bold and colourful.” Diane’s favourite designers include Coral Turner, Frank Lyman, Franco Mirabelli and Samuel Dong, who designed the coat she wore for the shoot. She loves rings in unusual shapes and stones like amethyst and turquoise, and says for her, style isn’t about the trends, it’s about quality and fit. Her partner in life is Charles Mady.

Sophia Chisholm describes her style as classic with a twist. “I’m not a fan of following the lastest fashion fads,” she says. Sophia enjoys classic designs, but in unique patterns and bright colours, and prefers tailored and fitted pieces over slouchy or baggy. Her favourite designers are Milly, Trina Turk, Jovani and Luisa Spagnoli. For our shoot, Sophia wore a silk day dress by Kay Unger New York and shoes by Prada. For casual events, she loves Lululemon clothing, Miss Me and True Religion jeans.Her favourite purses are by Harvey’s Seatbelt Bags. Sophia is secretary-treasurer of Rose City Ford and married to John Chisholm, who was named one of the best-dressed men last week. They have two daughters.

Kim Dendiuk is a business development, fundraising and event production professional. She says she has a “passion for fashion,” and loves to model for area boutiques and charity fashion shows. Her local fashion inspirations are Janis Miller and Elaine Chatwood, and she shops at Franco Angileri and Chatty Collection. Her historical fashion icons are Princess Diana and Jackie O. For our shoot, Kim wore an outfit by Fever of London, England, sold exclusively at Chatty Collection. She describes her style as “chic fashionista.” Kim and Joe Malec have two young sons.

Christina Fanelli works for Mastercraft Homes Windsor Inc., and describes her sense of style as “very feminine, polished and sophisticated.” She says her outfits are always chosen and put together well, but she always wants the effect to look “effortless as opposed to being too contrived.” She loves designers like Alice+Olivia, Nha Khanh, Black Halo and Halston Heritage. Her favourite accessory? Shoes and lots of them. Christina is married to Dave Schild and they have one child.

Maria Farah moved to Windsor five years ago to study biological sciences at the University of Windsor and wants to get her MBA in health care management. She currently works at Accucaps. Her favourite fashion quote comes from the legendary Coco Chanel, who said “A woman can be overdressed, but never over elegant.” Maria believes it isn’t about what brand a woman wears, but how she wears it that reflects her style and personality. “I like to have fun with my style and switch it up every now and then, but most importantly I have to feel comfortable and confident in what I’m wearing,” she says. Maria is a former Miss Lebanon Emigrant winner and placed in the Top 15 in the Miss International pageant in 2011.

Melanie Gardin has been fashion conscious since she was little girl. She says she drove her poor mother crazy when she was in kindergarten, because she refused to wear any outfit that came in contact with paint at the classroom’s art station. As a partner at Chapman Gordon Gardin Stewart law firm, her Monday to Friday look is suits and heels. In fact, she has about 40 suits in different colours and styles. When the work day ends, she goes for a classy, chic and feminine look. Melanie would rather hunt for rare and unique pieces than go for designer labels. She does have a bit of a shoe fetish, and her prized possession is a pair of Figgie hand-painted black high heels.Her pet peeves: Bunny slippers and PJs in public.

Jasmine Jasey thinks fashion should first and foremost be all about fun. She likes to shop at places like Savvy Boutique, Freeds of Windsor and Victoria Boutique for her dresses. Her one rule for buying a dress? It has to give her an OMG feeling. As a busy mom on the run, Lululemon fits the bill for casual attire. Jasmine thinks her hair is very important to her look, and she goes to Salon Utopia forcolour and cut. She takes ballroom dancing with her two children, and loves shoes by Kenneth Cole, Nine West and Ferragamo. Jasmine trained as a registered practical nurse and has been married to Dr. Gregory Jasey for 10 years.

Doris Lapico was born in Switzerland and studied in Perugia, Italy during the punk era. That was her first fashion influence. She moved here, completed her studies at the University of Windsor, co-founded Transition to Betterness and now works as a realtor. Her fashion icons include Sienna Miller, Kate Moss and Sophia Loren. Doris describes her style as having a “minimalist approach, filled with contrast and a love for current trends.” This season, she’s smitten by the shorts she sees on the runways, and she’s incorporated them into her wardrobe. An “independent fashionista,” she favours street wear and rock-inspired, edgy looks by Blondie and Gwen Stafani. Doris is married to Anthony Lapico and they have a son and a daughter.

Diane Saba is president of D. Saba & Associates Insurance and Financial Services. Her signature style is timeless and classic and her favourite designers are Donna Karan, Escada, Vince and St. John. In fact, she’s wearing an outfit by St. John Knits in this photo. But Diane also likes current trends. For her, it’s mixing the two to find the right balance. She loves travelling with family, entertaining, golf, theatre and the cinema. A founding board member of the Hotel-Dieu Grace Hospital Foundation, Diane thinks giving back to the community is important. She has two daughters and one pet peeve: Tardiness.