With an estimated 50 million active users worldwide, Tinder is one of the most popular dating apps among singletons looking for love.

Every day 26 million matches are made - leading to 1.5 million dates around the world every week - and now the identities of the most right-swiped people in the UK have been revealed by Cosmopolitan.

The most popular daters include a 23-year-old fashion marketeer, a 34-year-old game company director and a 28-year-old singer/songwriter.

THE MOST POPULAR WOMEN... Cressida Barrett: 23, fashion marketer Cressida, who works in fashion and has been on Tinder for over a year, was once wooed by a partner purely through the medium of sheep facts Time on Tinder: 1 year, 6 months Matches a day: 6 Number of first dates: 4 Embarrassing admission: Cressida says she was once wooed by a partner purely through the medium of sheep facts. She said: 'I think quite hard about the photos I put up. They say you judge someone within the first seven seconds of seeing them.' 'Obviously it makes you happy, it's a very pleasant feeling,' says Cressida. 'I knew I got attention on it – but had no idea of the extent.' Her type? Tall, dark and handsome men who 'do something active' Jade Orvis: 24, internal recruitment Jade, 24, has been on 13 first dates during the two years she's been using Tinder Time on Tinder: 2 years (after coming out of a long-term relationship) Matches a day: 5 Number of first dates: 13 Embarrassing admission: The best opening line Jade ever got was, 'Do you like dragons?' Her type? Jade, who right-swipes about 'one in 10' men a night whilst she is watching TV after work, finds that she matches with most of the people she swipes. I like to see a bit about their life – a friendship group or a hobby. I find that most people I swipe, I match with.' Sharing her secrets to success, she says having a mix of photos is important - including ones with friends, her pets and selfies. She also has a motivational quote from her favourite book, The Secret. She maintains that since she's tweaked her profile, it has improved the quality of her matches - and she chats to eight out of 10 of them. If you want to snag a date with her, don't compliment her ('they make me feel awkward') and don't ask: 'Hey, you OK?' Holly Mattar: 21, film student and model Film student Holly Mattar is one of the most popular women on the dating app Time on Tinder: 8 months Matches a day: 10 Number of first dates: 1 Embarrassing admission: Holly's bio is her Instagram name and a dolphin emoji. She thinks the dolphin speaks for itself. Speaking about her success rate, she said: 'I think it's my hair that makes me stand out. 'But I also select my photos really carefully. I like to include ones of me on holiday as I want people to think I have a fun life.' If you want to impress Holly, don't bother using selfies as your Tinder picture because she believe it makes you look very 'self-obsessed.'

But it's not all plain sailing for these popular users, who have also confessed to some embarrassing dating disasters - like being stood up at Winter Wonderland and being forced to ride the Ferris Wheel alone.

The team behind the match-making platform has also disclosed the top tips that lead to a successful search.

Tinder's in-house sociologist, Dr Jessica Carbino, said: 'Individuals that do well on Tinder are not necessarily the most attractive people in the room, they're the ones who are creating a profile that presents an authentic self, and then go about matching with people who they believe will be compatible.'

The expert revealed you are 14 per cent more likely to get a right swipe if you are smiling with your teeth showing.

'You're signaling that you're kind, warm and approachable,' said Dr Carbino.

Wearing glasses can reduce your chances of a right swipe by 12 per cent, according to the dating expert, because 'seeing the iris gives us clues as to whether you can be trusted.'

...AND THE MOST RIGHT-SWIPED MEN Ryan Gray: 27, financial consultant One of Ryan's matches was a Fifty Shades fan and pulled out a box of toys after a date Time on Tinder: 3 years, 7 months Matches a day: 4 Number of first dates: 18 Embarrassing admission: One of Ryan's matches had a Fifty Shades of Grey fetish (Ryan's surname is Gray, which was close enough for her). She pulled out a box of toys and asked him to act out some scenes. Stephen Ski: 27, business consultant A girl once fell asleep in Stephen's car on the way to their date, then stole his iPhone when he said he just wanted to go home Time on Tinder: 18 months Matches a day: 15 Number of first dates: 10 Embarrassing admission: A girl once fell asleep in his car on the way to their date, then stole his iPhone when he said he just wanted to go home. Stephen was 'surprised' to discover he was one of the most right-swiped men. If you want to impress him, he looks for 'friendly' women who smile a lot in their pictures and seek adventure. Jay: 30, model and personal trainer Model and personal trainer Jay, 30, is one of the most right-swiped men on Tinder Time on Tinder: 4 years Matches a day: 5 Number of first dates: 6 Embarrassing admission: Jay got stood up by a girl at Winter Wonderland. He waited for two hours before deciding to ride the Ferris wheel alone. Tom: 27, events company owner Events company owner Tom, 27, also features in the list of Tinder's most popular users Time on Tinder: 1 year, 2 months Matches a day: 10 Number of first dates: 5 Embarrassing admission: A date once slapped Tom after he said, 'I've got you all figured out.' He enjoyed it and continued seeing her for a couple of months. Stefan: 26, model and TV presenter Even when he's on boys' holidays, model Stefan still has one eye on his Tinder account Time on Tinder: 2 years Matches a day: 20 Number of first dates: 5 Embarrassing admission: Stefan once took a Tinder date out for dinner while on a boys' holiday in Marbella. Arthur: 19, musician It doesn't take much to make 19-year-old musician Arthur swipe left on a picture Time on Tinder: 1 year, 6 months Matches a day: 6 Number of first dates: 3 Embarrassing admission: He once swiped left on a girl because her headphones were tangled in her photo. Loui Blake: 26, entrepreneur The 26-year-old entrepreneur said he thought being vegan might put people off - but he's as popular as ever on Tinder Time on Tinder: 2 years Matches a day: 1 Number of first dates: 8 Embarrassing admission: He once took a date to a vegan sushi-making class, followed by an open-top bus tour. Loui believes he is popular on the app because he is 'approachable' and doesn't pose in his pictures. Loui, who has been single for four years, doesn't just look for love on Tinder; he also uses the app to meet new friends. He saw his right swipes increase when he added that he was a vegan. 'I recently put that I'm vegan in my profile and thought it would put people off but it didn't,' he said. Rich Lown: 28, singer/songwriter Tell Rich he looks like Gerard Butler for the best chance of a reply to your message Time on Tinder: 2 years Matches a day: 6 Number of first dates: 10 Embarrassing admission: Girls often flirt with Rich by telling him he looks like Gerard Butler, which he admits works every time. Rodney: 22, sports student Rodney has a tried and tested method for messaging a girl for the first time on Tinder Time on Tinder: 3 years Matches a day: 15 Number of first dates: 3 Embarrassing admission: He always opens conversations by sending a GIF of a guy sweating to insinuate that the girl is hot. Daniel: 34, gaming company director Daniel, 34, is a 6ft4in gaming company director who has used Tinder for six months Time on Tinder: 6 months Matches a day: 5 Number of first dates: 15 Embarrassing admission: His biggest turn-off is girls who request a certain height in their bios. However, Daniel has listed his own height in his. (He's 6ft4in).

Other tips include wearing colours to make a good impression - even though 72 per cent of users wear neutrals like navy, beige, black and grey.

Facing the camera in your photo also makes you 20 per cent more likely to get a positive reaction.

The dating expert added: 'The one thing I tell people to include in their profile is information that will start a conversation – things that are unique to you.

Facing the camera in your photo also makes you 20 per cent more likely to get a positive reaction. Left to right, Ryan Gray, Stefan, Cressida Barrett, Arthur and Loui Blake

According to research, 66% of users have matched with someone and never messaged them. Left to right, Stephen Ski, Jade Orvis, Rich, Rodney and Holly Mattar

'Individuals who ask a question are pretty successful because they are providing an easy way to start talking.'

The final piece of advice is to follow up on your matches. According to research, 66 per cent of users have matched with someone and never messaged them.

Stephen Ski, a 27-year-old business consultant, suggested the key to success is being 'genuine.'

Wearing colours helps to make a good impression - even though 72 per cent of users wear neutrals like navy, beige, black and grey. Left to right, Jay, Daniel and Tom

He said: 'I had no idea how my profile compared to other guys until I was with a couple of female friends looking at their Tinder accounts.

'I was intrigued to see what guys were putting on there and I was pretty shocked.

'Topless photos, pictures of animals… it made me think maybe I'm just a bit more genuine.'

The full feature appears in the February 2017 issue of Cosmopolitan, on sale today'