USS Gabrielle Giffords commissioned in Galveston

during the commissioning ceremony for the U.S.S. Gabrielle Giffords LCS-10 on Saturday, June 10, 2017, in Galveston. during the commissioning ceremony for the U.S.S. Gabrielle Giffords LCS-10 on Saturday, June 10, 2017, in Galveston. Photo: Brett Coomer, Houston Chronicle Photo: Brett Coomer, Houston Chronicle Image 1 of / 58 Caption Close USS Gabrielle Giffords commissioned in Galveston 1 / 58 Back to Gallery

GALVESTON – A proud Gabrielle Giffords stood in front of the hulking warship, inviting thousands of onlookers to consider what it takes to survive a staredown with death.

The former Arizona congresswoman beamed from a podium at Galveston's Pier 21 Saturday during the commissioning of a state-of-the-art naval vessel named to commemorate her resilience in surviving a 2011 assassination attempt. She called the namesake an "incredible honor" and thanked the U.S. armed forces for their continued sacrifices.

"I thought of you in my darkest days," she said.

The commissioning ceremony drew an estimated 2,200 spectators and a long roster of high-profile politicians and military leaders. Hillary Clinton, Jill Biden and Nancy Pelosi shared remarks alongside many others, each drawing parallels between Giffords' determination and the power of the ship and its crew.

"Standing here, six years later, nothing gives me greater joy and honor than seeing this great ship named for someone whose strength and resilience is a great lesson to us all," Clinton said.

At the start of her third congressional term, Giffords survived a deliberate, near-point-blank shot to the head in Tucson during a rampage that killed six people and wounded 12 others. When she resigned from Congress in 2012, former Navy Secretary Ray Mabus decided to name a warship for her.

It's somewhat uncommon for naval vessels to be named for living people: Only 13 such ships have been commissioned since 1850, according to the Navy. This one, sponsored by Jill Biden, was the 16th to be named after a woman.

The 422-foot littoral combat ship, flanked with guns and missiles, is part of a new class of high-speed vessels designed to target mines, submarines and other warships in coastal areas. It's the fifth of its kind to enter the country's naval fleet and one of 11 planned for delivery by shipbuilder Austal USA as part of a $3.5 billion contract.

Craig Perciavalle, the company's U.S. president, said the vessels can travel into shallower water than other combat ships, allowing the Navy access more ports around the world. Their sleeker bodies allow them to travel faster than 45 miles per hour.

"You don't see too many of these types of ships being built anywhere in the world," Perciavalle said.

The ship arrived in Galveston earlier this month after launching from Mobile, Ala., where it was built. It will depart in the coming days to San Diego for regular duty.

Adm. William Moran, vice chief of naval operations, said the new ship and others like it will bolster the country's ability to deter war.

"If we have to go to war, we're going to kick somebody's you-know-what and win," he said.

A core crew of 50 officers and enlisted men and women will serve aboard the vessel.

Patty Kelso, a Navy mom, traveled from Michigan to watch her son, a lieutenant commander, report for duty. It was her first commissioning, a ceremony made more special by the high-profile attendees, she said.

"We're very proud," she said.

Giffords and her husband, astronaut and retired U.S. Navy Capt. Mark Kelly, have ties to the Houston area. She spent several months at TIRR Memorial Hermann recovering from the shooting, and Kelly was stationed near Galveston for 15 years during his time with NASA.

Kelly accompanied Giffords on the stage and took the podium to applaud her "courage and grit." Those characteristics, he said, are the same ones sought in a warship.

"Like Gabby, this ship will face down some lethal threats," he said. "But it will persevere through that adversity, and it will leave our lesser adversaries in her great wake."