Overview (3)

Mini Bio (1)

Spouse (1)

Trade Mark (1)

Chubby, but athletic



Trivia (25)



April 2000 - lives in an L.A. bachelor pad with his older brother, Gary Valentine , who is also a stand-up comedian.



He was raised in Stony Brook, NY, and graduated from Ward Melville High School (Long Island, New York) in 1983. One of his wrestling teammates at Ward Melville High School was future WWE star and author Mick Foley ("Mankind"). He also attended Cortland University with Mick Foley

His big break came in 1996 when he won at the "Just for Laughs" Montreal Comedy Festival.



In June 1999 and 2000, he hosted the Florida Sports Awards, the official sports award show for the state of Florida, in Jacksonville, Fla. This event raises funds for the Otis F. Smith Foundation.



He met his wife on a blind date arranged by his interior decorator.





19 June 2004 - He married his longtime girlfriend, model Steffiana De La Cruz , before 180 friends - including Ray Romano - and family members in Dana Point, California.

Is a New York Jets and a New York Mets fan.





His wife, Steffiana De La Cruz , gave birth to their first child, daughter Sienna-Marie James, on Friday September 30, 2005.

Is an avid golfer and fan of the Ultimate Fighting Championship.





Attended Cortland University, along with former wrestler and current best selling author Mick Foley (with whom he also attended high school).



One of his teammates on the wrestling team at Ward Melville High School was future WWE star and author Mick Foley

Born to Janet and Joseph Valentine Knipfing.





Kevin and Steffiana De La Cruz , became the parents of a second girl, Shea Joelle James, on June 14, 2007, in Los Angeles. Was named after New York's Shea Stadium.



Close friends with Ray Romano . They met while doing stand-up comedy, on the comedy circuit.

Is a member of Pi Lambda Phi fraternity.



Claims to have run a 4.6 sec. 40-yard dash in high school.





Helped corner Bas Rutten for his comeback fight (win by KO -- Leg Kicks) vs. Ruben Villareal at an MMA event ( Inside MMA (2007)) held on July 22, 2006.



His wife, Steffiana De La Cruz , gave birth to their third child, a boy named Kannon Valentine James, on April 24, 2011 (Easter Sunday).

His father was of German descent.



Is a Republican.





His wife, Steffiana De La Cruz , gave birth to their fourth child, a daughter named Sistine Sabella James in late January 2015 weighed in at 9 lbs., 8 oz.

In the King of Queens, Doug Heffernan's parents are named Janet and Joe, which are also Kevin James' parents' names.





The number "9" is a staple among his television career: Everybody Loves Raymond (1996) (the series in which his character Doug Heffernan originated from) ran for nine years, his spin-off series The King of Queens (1998) ran for nine years, and the pilot episode of his new series Kevin Can Wait (2016) premiered nine years after the series finale of his spin-off.

Personal Quotes (34)



It was fun because, after shooting, Will and I would eat a jar of pickles and tell each other secrets. It was so much fun! - On Hitch (2005).

There's no better feeling in the world than a warm pizza box on your lap.



Thanksgiving, man. Not a good day to be my pants.



I had many teachers that were great, positive role models and taught me to be a good person and stand up and be a good man. A lot of the principles they taught me still affect how I act sometimes and it's 30 years later.



I just want to put some positive stuff out there. If it works, great. If it doesn't, no problem.



A song can take you to a special time in your life.



Back in '93 I saw my first UFC fight and just became enamored by it then.



Every few months I'll pop into a comedy club or go to Vegas.



Every time I do a movie where it gets physical, I say never again.



For some reason and I don't know why, but I don't think that I'm funny in California. So I always want to do my movies east somewhere.



From there, I tried out for a community theatre play, joined an improv group... it all started opening up.



I could never be James Bond.



I don't want to be known as this goody-two-shoes who can only do comedies where puppies are licking peanut butter off my face.



I had my boy in Boston on Easter Sunday. That kills me, from a sports perspective. He's a Boston baby and I'm a New York guy.



I never played a musical instrument growing up but I knew kids who did and took it very seriously.



I never played music, but it's an important thing ... the studying, the inspiration.



I really wasn't a class clown.



I think I invented the phrase 'Don't overdo it.'



I took a public speaking class in college and managed to make the class laugh a little bit.



I try to connect with the everyday, every guy.



I would always love to be an athlete, but it's got to be a tough day when you have to hang up those cleats.



I'm not a Hollywood guy.



I've always had something in my heart where I root for guys who struggle with women.



If I do a movie where I have to have a son and it's a chubby kid, my mother is always like, 'You were never like that.' She gets so upset about it.



It's always cool to meet people who can do things that you have no capacity to do.



Just me onstage with a mike having an intimate relationship with the audience. I don't get nervous for that. I just get excited.



My favorite movie of all time is 'Rocky.'



Now I'm starting to jog. But every time I do jog I have 9-1 pressed into my phone, with the next '1' ready to be launched in case I drop.



Teachers have a chance to mold someone, inspire them. I hope all teachers realize that.



You think school ends when it ends, but it doesn't.



As American as an apple is and as American as baseball is, they don't go together. You can't be chewing an apple at a baseball game. You've got to let go of the diet that day.



I want to do movies that I'm proud of where my kids, at some point, can see and I can feel comfortable sitting there watching it with them. And just that move people. That make people feel a little bit better about themselves when they leave the theatre.



I've always been the guy who doesn't necessarily get it with women. A woman would have to say, 'I like you, I want to go out with you, you can ask me.' And still I would question it. Did she mean it?



Once a year my back will go out and it'll be... it's like a sciatic thing and it's the smallest thing. Like I could be leaning over the sink to brush my teeth in a weird way and it happens.



Salary (1)