Time is running out to provide your input on proposed Metrobus changes.

Every year, Metrobus planners propose service changes to maintain a Bus State of Good Operations (SOGO). This year’s official public participation period went live on Saturday, August 15 and will close at 5:00pm on Wednesday, September 23. That’s less than two weeks away!

Halfway through the public comment period, we thought we would give you sense of the process so far.

More than 3,000 online surveys have been completed. Two-thirds of these returns are from direct email outreach to customers using affected routes. If you are interested in receiving invitations to similar online surveys in the future, please register your SmarTrip card.

With more than 20 outreach events completed or scheduled, we are collecting feedback by going straight to the customer. Metro staff is out riding buses and showing up at bus stops and rail stations. We understand not everyone can go online so we are coming to them. Look for us and help us improve your bus experience.

These outreach activities have resulted in more than 2,000 written comments from customers all over the region.

At the time of this writing, the elimination of the 5A is not being well received nor is the elimination of the segment between McPherson Square and Kennedy Center on the Route 80. Many in the District are giving favorable marks to the free transfer between Capitol Heights/Addison Road Metrorail stations for select routes. Maryland customers are also excited for the Q Line free transfer to and from the Metrorail Red Line between Wheaton and Silver Spring.

In addition to English-language replies, we have received completed surveys from Spanish, Vietnamese, and Amharic speakers. Customers from all economic and ethnic groups are chiming in as well.

We want to hear more from our customers to see how these changes would affect your travel choices. Let us know how major service changes would impact you. Join the conversation by reading the official docket and submitting your thoughts online or in person.

-Email your comments to writtentestimony@wmata.com

-Talk to Metro staff at a pop-up event

–Take an online survey

-Attend the public hearing on Thursday, September 17 at WMATA HQ (600 5th St NW, Washington, DC 20001).

Related Posts: