Image copyright PA Image caption Clockwise from top left: Matthew Lucas, Lee Walls, Malcolm Reeves and Matthew Loosemore

A police helicopter was used to film two people "brazenly" having sex in their garden, a court heard.

The trial of two South Yorkshire Police officers and two pilots has begun at Sheffield Crown Court.

Matthew Lucas, 42, Lee Walls, 47, Matthew Loosemore, 45, and Malcolm Reeves, 64, all deny misconduct in a public office.

On other occasions people sunbathing naked and naturists at a campsite were filmed, the court was told.

Live updates on this story and others from across South Yorkshire

Richard Wright QC prosecuting, said the crew used their "unique viewing position [and] powerful video camera" to film people "in a gross violation of privacy."

The court heard that five people were filmed sunbathing naked, as well as naturists on a campsite, and a couple having sex in their garden.

Image copyright PA Image caption Former police officer Adrian Pogmore has previously admitted four charges of misconduct in a public office

Pilots Mr Reeves, of Farfield Avenue, Knaresborough, North Yorkshire, denies two counts of misconduct in a public office, and Mr Loosemore, of Briar Close, Auckley, Doncaster, denies one count.

Police officers Mr Walls, of Southlands Way, Aston, Sheffield, denies one count, and Mr Lucas, of Coppice Rise, Chapeltown, Sheffield, denies three counts.

A fifth man, former police officer Adrian Pogmore, 50, of Whiston in Rotherham, has admitted four charges of misconduct in a public office.

Footage showed a couple having sex on their patio in July 2008 and at one point the naked woman waves at the aircraft.

Image caption The court was told the crew used a powerful video camera to film people

Mr Wright said the couple shared Pogmore's interest in swinging and added it was "no coincidence" that the helicopter flew above "while they brazenly put on a show."

The accused deny the charges and, "in short", blame Pogmore for what happened, Mr Wright said.

A couple sitting naked by a caravan were also filmed unawares in July 2008, and the aircraft filmed a garden where a woman was sunbathing naked with her daughters in 2007.

The court heard the woman felt the filming was "a complete and utter violation of my privacy" and added: "It makes me feel sick to think that this took place."

In 2012 other naked sunbathers were filmed, the jury were told.

Statements from all except the couple filmed having sex on the patio - who did not make a statement to police - said their privacy had been invaded.

Mr Wright told the court it was a "gross waste of valuable resource".

The trial continues and is expected to last three weeks.