On the Same Day Bannon Removed From NSC, Trump Sabre Rattles War with Syria

This isn’t what I signed up for. If it’s Trump’s intention to continue the neocon policies that have left this country indebted to its eyeballs fighting meaningless wars, costing the lives of America’s bravest, count me out.

Bannon’s removal at the NSC on the same day that Trump upped his rhetoric for war with Assad isn’t a coincidence. Bannon has been an anti war advocate and wanted America out of the Middle East. Now here we are, being led down a ruinous road by 35 year old Jared Kushner and Trump’s generals, positioning for conflict in Syria over a chemical weapons attack.

In regard to the chemical attack that has left dozens dead, many of whom were children, no one knows with certainty who was responsible. There is so much fuckery going on there, you’ll drive yourself mad trying to figure it out.

Then there’s this.

Disgraced Dr. @DrShajulIslam received gas masks two days before "chemical attack" in Al Qaeda held #Idlib

The propaganda continues. #Syria pic.twitter.com/jPncQgtuXo — H e b a (@HKX07) April 5, 2017

Wow. This anti-Assad "reporter" tweeted about the sarin attack in #Syria 24 hours before it happened. Still think nothing fishy is going on? pic.twitter.com/xrGWemylFW — Sarah Abdallah (@sahouraxo) April 5, 2017





Here is President Trump’s response.

President Trump calls the Syria chemical attack "so horrific" https://t.co/01vVkC2lHN pic.twitter.com/QGrG5utki1 — Bloomberg (@business) April 5, 2017

Trump: #Syria chemical attack "crossed many, many lines, beyond a red line." pic.twitter.com/sJa14Hfhaw — Omar Ghabra (@omarghabra) April 5, 2017

Asked his message to Iranian militias in Syria, Trump says "You'll see. They will have a message, you will see what the message will be." pic.twitter.com/zrDqwllTtK — Tommy Christopher (@tommyxtopher) April 5, 2017

Trump told @GlennThrush and me that Syria was an "affront to humanity," as he just did at presser. Also of Russia's role: "disappointing" — Maggie Haberman (@maggieNYT) April 5, 2017

Thus far, we have a President pursuing conflict escalations in both N. Korea and Syria. Everyone wants to be Churchill. We get to feel the brunt, however.

If you enjoy the content at iBankCoin, please follow us on Twitter