Green Party presidential nominee Jill Stein said early Sunday that she will file a lawsuit in federal court on Monday seeking a statewide recount in Pennsylvania.

Stein in a tweet said she would “escalate” #Recount2016 and demand a recount on constitutional grounds.

“The people deserve answers,” she added.

On Monday, I will escalate #Recount2016 in PA and file to demand a statewide recount on constitutional grounds. The people deserve answers. — Dr. Jill Stein (@DrJillStein) December 4, 2016

Stein also said the state’s election law and recount process raise questions about due process and whether fundamental democratic rights are protected.”

PA’s election law and recount process raise serious questions about due process and whether fundamental democratic rights are protected. — Dr. Jill Stein (@DrJillStein) December 4, 2016

ADVERTISEMENT

Her lawyer on Saturday withdrew a state lawsuit seeking a recount in Pennsylvania, saying in a filing that the petitioners are “regular citizens of ordinary means” who “cannot afford to post the $1,000,000 bond required by the Court.”

Stein has raised almost $7 million toward her recount efforts in Pennsylvania, Michigan and Wisconsin.

She questioned late Saturday why millions of dollars must be raised in order to trust the results of the election.

How odd is it that we must jump through bureaucratic hoops and raise millions of dollars so we can trust our election results? #Recount2016 — Dr. Jill Stein (@DrJillStein) December 4, 2016

She added that the recount is so expensive because leaders have refused to invest in modern voting systems.

#Recount2016 is so expensive because of elected leaders who have refused to invest in a 21st-century voting system. — Dr. Jill Stein (@DrJillStein) December 4, 2016

Stein also said the state court was ill-equipped to handle the challenge.

Stein is scheduled to hold a press conference and rally outside Trump Tower in New York on Monday, defending her push for recounts in several states.