Manchester United will accelerate contract talks with David de Gea after agreeing an 18-month deal with World Cup winner Victor Valdes.

As revealed by MailOnline, United are set to announce that Valdes, 32, will become the club’s first signing of the transfer window after the out-of-contract goalkeeper came through an extended trial.

The signing of a man who won three Champions League medals at Barcelona and was in Spain’s 2010 World Cup-winning squad has raised questions about De Gea’s future. The 24-year-old has only 18 months left on his contract and is being courted by Real Madrid.

David de Gea has been a rock at the heart of Manchester United's defence and the club will want to keep him

Victor Valdes (left) works out, wearing a Red Devils snood, with United's first-choice keeper De Gea

The Spain keeper has agreed an 18-month deal with United as he bids to return to action after injury

Valdes was recovering from injury and has not played since last March

Former Barcelona keeper Valdes' attitude has impressed staff and players at United

United chief executive Ed Woodward and De Gea’s agent Jorge Mendes plan to move the matter of the player’s contract forward this month in the hope he will agree to stay.

De Gea has not closed his mind to a move back to Spain but he and his parents, who remain influential, are not actively looking to leave Manchester and recently declared themselves happy and settled in the North West.

United manager Louis van Gaal has said little about his plans for Valdes but has been impressed enough in recent weeks to offer him a deal.

Current No 2 Anders Lindegaard is not considered good enough by Van Gaal.

Goalkeeper Anders Lindegaard (left) could be allowed to return to Scandinavia

United say they won't stand in the way of Ben Amos (right) should another club come knocking

Valdes is currently living in the Lowry Hotel in the city centre but is believed to be looking for property in the same area as his compatriots De Gea, Juan Mata and Ander Herrera.

Valdes will also bring his family to live with him in Manchester.