SWAK — And Baked Goods!

For Christmas, my grandparents sent me a gift card to Williams Sonoma. That afternoon, I scoured the store’s website, as excited as a kid in a candy store as I browsed page after page of rolling pins, cookie cutters, and grill pans. During my search, I discovered two differed sizes of pretty gold loaf pans that, with tax, added up to almost the exact amount on the card.

But at the mall, too many other post-Christmas shoppers liked the smaller loaf pan and snatched all of them off the shelves before I even set foot in the store. Disappointed, I still bought the larger size and resolved to send my thank-you card once Williams Sonoma restocked the mini pans.

Unfortunately, life turned into a whirling tornado of activity shortly after the holidays, and I have yet to drive back to the store—or mail my letter. But I finally mixed up a moist batter to break in the first pan, and if I hadn’t devoured the entire loaf, I would have slipped a few slices into a box to send along with the belated thank-you card.

Pear and Applesauce Quick Bread

serves 16

This quick bread is extremely moist, perfect for breakfast, a snack, or even a sweet treat after dinner. Substitute apples for the pear if you prefer.

2 c. whole-wheat flour

½ c. granulated sugar

2 tsp baking powder

¾ tsp baking soda

½ tsp ground cinnamon

¼ tsp nutmeg

¾ c. unsweetened applesauce

¼ c. agave nectar

2 tsp vanilla

1 pear, diced

Preheat the oven to 325° and coat an 8×4” baking tin with nonstick spray. In a large bowl, whisk together the dry ingredients (flour through nutmeg). Add in the applesauce, agave, and vanilla, stirring just until moist. Gently fold in the pears. Pour the batter into the prepared tin, and bake at 325° for 45-60 min or until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean. Check after 30-35 min; if the top is browning too quickly, cover the tin with foil and continue baking until done. Cool in the pan for 10 min before turning out onto a wire rack to cool completely. Cover the bread in plastic wrap and tin foil, and refrigerate for 8 hrs or overnight to allow the flavors to deepen.

Advertisements