www.Santoleri.com & www.Artist1.com

Nicholas Santoleri is an award-winning landscape, still life,

and portrait realism artist from (Chester County) Pennsylvania. Original paintings and fine art prints.

“The S-Bridge to Manayunk (Circa 1918)” award-winning watercolor by Nicholas P. Santoleri 2018

Recent Works Completed in 2018:

Recent Works Completed in 2017:

Works Completed in 2016:

“Ocean Pathway” (Ocean Grove, NJ) , an original pencil drawing and open edition print. ➡



Santoleri’s Artwork

For more than 30 years, Santoleri has created stunning and realistic art, and prints of many of his works are now available for your home or office.

Santoleri’s artworks highlight notable landscapes from throughout the Northeast, from Boathouse Row and Independence Hall in his Philadelphia, Pennsylvania backyard to other vistas from New Jersey, Delaware, New York, Maryland, and Massachusetts. He also captures some Italian landscape views, adding international perspective to his portfolio.

His watercolors, pencil drawings, and other media works also include portraits and still-life paintings captured in the realist style. Among his more notable portraits is an oil painting of former President Bill Clinton, which currently hangs at the Thoreau Institute in Concord, Massachusetts.

Many of Santoleri’s works have also helped support charitable efforts, such as fundraising drives for Salvation Army, the Ronald McDonald House and many other agencies. He is also a member of the Philadelphia Sketch Club, and continues refining his skills at the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts. Read biography here… ➡

This website may be searched by key terms to help find a specific view or site. For more information on prints or specific artworks, contact the art studio at 610-995-2047.

↓ Slideshow ↓































🙂 Please join our E-Mail list We are not spammy. Subscribe to get seasonal updates on new art and events.

Nicholas Santoleri ~ Artist Pine Ridge Productions, Inc.

1515 West Chester Pike Unit A-6, West Chester, PA 19382

In Historic Chester County, Pennsylvania