Capcom revealed some new details on their upcoming Resident Evil 6 at their Captivate event last week and… damn.

As we already know, Resident Evil 6 includes Leon S. Kennedy and Chris Redfield- the two main protagonists of the RE franchise- both. In one single game. The game also features a new character, a mysterious mercenary called Jake Muller. Here’s the shocker- he’s Albert Wesker’s son (many already guessed it, so congrats to them).

All three of them will have sidekicks in the game- Leon is paired with US government agent Helena Harper, Chris with BSAA member Piers Nivans and Jake with Sherry Birkin daughter of two former Umbrella scientists.

All three main characters will have their own story– they will have different storylines, playable separately, and all three stories will be woven together seamlessly (so it seems). The three campaigns will also have co-op modes, which makes it that much more awesome.

This basically gives us three games in one, all three with two meaty modes.

“There are a couple of ways we’re trying to differentiate the stories in the game,” states Kobayashi (via mweb.co.za). “For example, we’re trying to incorporate horror elements into all the stories. But as you know horror is a big genre and there are different types of horror. So Leon’s story is more traditional Gothic horror, Chris is in battle and as he fights his way and moves forward the things that he encounters are horrific in their own way. Jake [new character, son of Albert Wesker] as mentioned is trying to escape from the country he was in, so he’s being chased and followed. So there’s that certain tension and horror element to his story that is different to that of Chris or Leon. So we’re trying to present a different iteration of horror in each of the stories.

Story-wise, the main characters of the game will be facing the new C-virus and the new Chrysalide, both of which are new threats that will pit you against dangerous foes.

You can watch the latest trailer here.