Get the biggest daily stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

An advert for a job with Krispy Kreme in Co Down was "incorrect", the company has confirmed.

Job advertisements marked for the North Down District sparked rumours the US donut chain was preparing to open its first Northern Irish store.

Roles for team members and a shift leader were advertised for Krispy Kreme in the North Down District area with full and part-time roles apparently up for grabs.

But the company has since confirmed they made a mistake and the job had been listed incorrectly.

However, that does not mean hopes for a store opening in Northern Ireland were dashed.

A spokeswoman for Krispy Kreme said: "Last week, a job located in the North Down area was advertised. This advert was incorrect and the job was in fact for a new store in England. This has since been corrected, apologies for the misinformation.

"Do‘nought fear though, we are actively scouting a number of locations to open our first Irish store The specifics are not confirmed at this stage, but we’re very excited to spread the joy of Krispy Kreme across the Irish sea next year – so watch this space!"

Demand is high in Northern Ireland for a Krispy Kreme store to be opened and at the start of this year an online campaign was started to get a Krispy Kreme store in Belfast gained hundreds of supporters.

A fan of the American donut chain started the group on Facebook in a bid to get the company to open its first Northern Irish store.

Currently there are no Krispy Kreme outlets in Northern Ireland, or the Republic. The company also sells its products in certain retail outlets in store cabinets in other parts of the UK.

They can be found in Tesco, Moto, Welcome Break and Roadchef. However, this is not yet the case in Northern Ireland.

Krispy Kreme previously said they want their first Irish Hotlight store to be in and around Dublin, they are also looking for 25-30 sites across the UK for new shops, kiosks and box stores.