Luis Enrique Rodriguez, 18, of Anaheim, was arrested in connection with rioting in Huntington Beach on July 28, 2013 after he 'liked' the Police Department's Facebook page, apparetly "proud of his actions," authorities said.

After more than four months of investigation, 20 people have been arrested in connection with this summer's rioting after a major pro surf contest in Huntington Beach, police said.

The rioting started after a fight broke out July 28 across from the beach where thousands of spectators had gathered for the popular nine-day U.S. Open of Surfing.

The crowd toppled portable toilets, threw items from rooftops and smashed car windows along the popular downtown strip lined with restaurants, bars and surf and skate shops.

Police fired pepper balls and rubber projectiles to break up the melee. Some 250 officers responded to the disturbance.

Bike Shop Repairs Window After Vandalism

A bike shop window shattered in Sunday's violence has been replaced as police continue the search for vandals who stormed through the streets Sunday evening after a surf competition. Jacob Rascon reports for the NBC4 News at Noon on Tuesday July 30, 2013. (Published Tuesday, July 30, 2013)

One person was treated for injuries at a hospital after apparently being hit by a flying bottle and one of the rubber projectiles, police said.

Since then, detectives have collected what they said were "vast amounts of evidence" with the help of tips from the community to identify those responsible.

"To date, we have been able to arrest everyone involved that we have be able to identity," the Huntington Beach Police Department said on its Facebook page.

Huntington Beach Holds Meeting to Discuss Future Safety of U.S. Open Following Riots

The Huntington Beach City Council held a special meeting to discuss Sunday’s riots following the U.S. Open of Surfing. A judge told suspect Chase Scott Christman in court Tuesday that he cannot go back to Huntington Beach where he is accused of vandalism and inciting a riot. Vikki Vargas reports from Huntington Beach for the NBC4 News at 5 p.m. on July 30, 2013. (Published Tuesday, July 30, 2013)

Authorities have made felony and misdemeanor arrests for possession of stolen property, vandalism, inciting a riot, participating in a riot, assault on a peace officer, vandalism, assault with a deadly weapon and arson.

Others were being investigated for drunken conduct and failure to disperse.

More Southern California Stories:

Local Firefighter Arrested in Connection With Huntington Beach Riot