In January

WizKids has revealed details on its upcoming line of licensed Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles Dice Masters products, scheduled to release in January.

Five new products are planned for the initial release, including a Box Set, a Team Box, a Playmat, a Tin Set, and a series of Dice Bags. These products are part of WizKids’ new line of TMNT products announced at Origins, which will also include HeroClix figures (see “‘Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles’ Comes to Tabletop”).

The new series includes more than a dozen new characters for the Dice Masters game, including the turtles themselves: Michelangelo, Donatello, Raphael, and Leonardo, as well as their allies and enemies.

The Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles Dice Masters Box Set includes everything needed to play the game, including dice and cards. MSRP is $34.99. The Tin Set will package those in a deluxe metal box. MSRP is $39.99.

The Team Box will be a sturdy plastic box with a magnetic closure and internal compartments for sorting dice and cards. Dice and cards featuring the four turtles and Splinter will also be included. MSRP is $19.99.

The Playmat helps players keep their dice organized during the game, with color-coded areas for holding dice and cards, and a track for recording player “life” during the game. The mat will measure 24 inches by 13 inches. MSRP is $19.99.

Dice Bags will be available in five different styles, including versions for each of the main Turtles characters and a more general TMNT version. MSRP is $14.99 for each bag.

Dice Masters combines elements of collectible card games and deckbuilder games, primarily using dice instead of cards. The Marvel Dice Masters core set, released last year, was honored with an Origins Vanguard Award at the Origins Game Fair last month, and was recently expanded with the introduction of the Amazing Spider-Man set (see “New Set For Award-Winning ‘Marvel Dice Masters’”). Dice Masters continues to be quite popular, ranking fifth on ICv2’s top 10 list for Spring of 2015 (see “Top Collectible Games-Spring 2015”).