The official website for the Fairy Tail: Dragon Cry anime film announced on Wednesday that the film will open in at least 16 countries besides Japan in May. As of April 26, the countries will be the United States, the United Kingdom, Ireland, Australia, New Zealand, nine countries in Central America and South America, Thailand, and France.

The film will open in Japan on May 6.



The cast includes:



Tetsuya Kakihara as Natsu Dragneel Aya Hirano as Lucy Heartfilia

Rie Kugimiya as Happy

Yūichi Nakamura as Gray Fullbuster

Sayaka Ohara as Erza Scarlet

Satomi Satou as Wendy

Yui Horie as Charles

Makoto Furukawa as King Animus, the king of Stella kingdom.

Aoi Yūki as Sonya, an aide to King Animus

Jiro Saito as Zash Caine, the minister of state of Stella Kingdom



Tatsuma Minamikawa (episode director for Aldnoah.Zero, Attack on Titan, Haganai NEXT) is directing the film at A-1 Pictures. Shoji Yonemura is returning from the previous two television anime series to write the script, Yuuko Yamada (chief animation director for Hakkenden: Eight Dogs of the East, Persona 3 the Movie #3 Falling Down) is the character designer and chief animation director, and Yasuharu Takanashi is returning from the previous anime series and Fairy Tail Zero to compose the music. GAGA is distributing the film.

The two-member unit Polka Dots (pictured right) is performing the film's theme song "What You Are." The duo is composed of i☆Ris member Himika Akaneya and Mimi Meme MIMI member Yuki Takao. Polka Dots previously performed an insert song for the Trinity Seven: Eternal Library & Alchemic Girl anime film.

Those who purchase advance tickets for the film in Japan will receive clear files with Mashima's special illustration of Natsu. Theaters showing the film will give viewers a free booklet while supplies last. The booklet contains the rough storyboards for the film that original manga creator Hiro Mashima drew. Mashima drew 193 pages of storyboard for the film, and is also serving as executive producer. Mashima also drew rough sketches for the characters and the key visuals for the film.

Starting in the movie's second week in Japan on May 13, each filmgoer will receive one of three randomly distributed character bromide photos of Natsu, Lucy, or Sonya, complete with a reproduced signature of the respective character's voice cast member.

Sources: Oricon, Anime Now!