Joy C Raphael’s new book, Slaves of Saudis: Terrorisation of foreign workers, sheds light on the infamous reality of migrant workers in Saudi Arabia. Not only does the author gather multiple stories of Asian workers, including Indians, being mistreated in the kingdom, he also put them in context with historical and cultural details about the Gulf region. The book is more a collection of short testimonies written in a journalistic way than a non-fiction novel.

Raphael is a senior journalist who has worked in Saudi Arabia for 14 years. He is currently the editorial pages editor of the Oman Tribune in Muscat, Oman.What is the purpose of your book? JCR: The book exposes what’s happening in Saudi Arabia to migrant workers. I have seen it all. Even in my earlier book, Mutawas: Saudi Arabia's Dreaded Religious Police, I exposed what the religious police was up to and their foul behaviour with expats and even Saudis.

What responsibility, if any, does the Indian government have in the situation faced by its citizens in Saudi Arabia?JCR: The Indian government is clearly not equipped to deal with the problems faced by over two million Indians in Saudi Arabia. The embassy cannot handle all the issues. Moreover, the Indian government wants smooth relations with Saudi Arabia for several reasons, such as oil and the Muslim votebank, and so looks the other way. Of course, NRI minister Vyalar Ravi and others pay lip service to the problems Indians face, but nothing much is ever done. So the problems linger on and on and get bigger and bigger.

DNA special: Saudi localisation drive is latest blow to NRKs

How do you see the situation for Indian workers in Saudi Arabia with the new "Nitaqat" labor law?

JCR: A lot of Indians are going to lose their jobs. But you cannot blame the Saudi government for that. There is high unemployment there — about 30% — and a lot of discontent, so the government has to do something. And that is to ensure employment for Saudis.

Then, there are news reports that thousands of Indians based in Saudi Arabia are applying for emergency certificates to leave the country. These are people without passports. In other words, illegal aliens. Now why did they become illegal aliens? They all ran away from their employers to escape different forms of brutality. Many may not have been paid their salaries for months.Some people have called Indians to leave Saudi Arabia and boycott the country. What are your thoughts on this?JCR: Boycotting Saudi Arabia is all hogwash. We need them more than they need us. A good number of Indians are getting their salaries and are being treated well. They need the jobs. I don't think they will leave. And there are thousands waiting to come as the rupee is sinking — 58 to a dollar. That's great money. If Indians don't go, others are there to take up jobs. Countries like Saudi Arabia will need expats for a long time, and there are enough Filipinos, Pakistanis, Sri Lankans ready to go.