We started SpectroCoin, an all in one solution for cryptocurrencies, back in 2013. By January 2017 we had over 130,000 clients. As we approach 2018, we are happy to announce we have surpassed the 500,000 client milestone.



In over four years of being in the crypto scene, we have learned a lot and have grown together with our customer base. Throughout the years, we have been driven by the core goal of offering the best possible service to our customers. That is why we are constantly working on expanding our service range.

This year we launched a peer-to-peer fund transfer capability that allows clients to send any currency supported by SpectroCoin instantly and free of charge between SpectroCoin accounts. We have also introduced pre-paid debit cards that are directly linked to SpectroCoin wallets and allow clients to spend cryptocurrencies by exchanging them to a preferred fiat currency such as EUR, USD, and GBP on the spot. Furthermore, we are the only cryptocurrency wallet in the market to have introduced the possibility to claim International Bank Account Numbers. That is in addition to the more than 20 fiat and cryptocurrencies we have been adding to our services over the years with more than 20 money deposit and withdrawal methods available.

From day one we set big goals ourselves. That is why this year we also introduced our operational fork Bankera – a banking project that connects the traditional banking world with the crypto world. Bankera is currently holding its ICO sale to collect funds for the project and, together with its pre-ICO, has already collected over 30 million euros.

In addition to the expansion of our services, we have welcomed over 50 employees to our team in fields of expertise such IT, Finance, Customer Support, and Marketing. These new team members are here to help us grow even more.

However, none of this could have been done without you, so we want to say 500,000 Thank-Yous.

We will continue working hard, and we hope you will carry on with us through the journey. If you have not done so, join us now!