Nastiest debate ever? Catch up on what you missed

CLOSE The second presidential debate of the 2016 was full of action. Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton Video provided by TheStreet Newslook

The second presidential debate between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump in St. Louis was one for the history books. Catch up on all the highlights right here:

Well, that was interesting

Will Trump's attacks on the Clintons — both Hillary and Bill — steady his struggling campaign? Will Clinton's defenses and counter-attacks help build her lead?

Aides will be examining polling data in the coming days for answers.

We'll see you in 10 days for the third and final Clinton-Trump debate, this one in Las Vegas.

— David Jackson

They had (almost) equal time

CNN has the stats, and some credit goes to the moderators for keeping this tight.

— Donovan Slack

Trump scores top moments on Facebook

Though they weren’t necessarily all good. Facebook logged these as the top moments on the site.

1. Trump dismisses his running mate: “He and I haven’t spoken, and I disagree.”

2. Trump responds to Clinton saying it’s good someone like him isn’t in charge of the law: “Because you’d be in jail.”

3. Trump: “No, I’m a gentleman, Hillary. Go ahead.”

And in overall Facebook buzz, which includes posts, likes and shares, Trump was referenced in 76% of the debate conversation on the site, while Clinton was referenced in 24%. Here are the top subjects Facebook users were talking about:

• ISIS

• Trump Tapes

• Taxes

• Government Ethics

• Health care

Over on Twitter, the same moments created the most buzz, although in a slightly different order:

Top 3 Tweeted Moments of the US presidential #debate: pic.twitter.com/ZxUsdrLLMK — Twitter Government (@gov) October 10, 2016

— Donovan Slack

A positive ending

Question: Can one of you say something positive about the other?

Clinton praises Trump's children — and laments the "conflict-oriented" election. Trump says he is very proud of his children — and praises Clinton's resilience.

"She doesn't quit," he says. "She doesn't give up."

Unlike the start, the debate ends with a handshake.

— David Jackson

Energy and the environment

A town hall guests asks about energy policy — and how it might affect the environment.

Trump says "energy is under siege by the Obama administration" and that Clinton wants to put coal miners out of business. He says he will lift regulations in energy companies — and says little about the environment.

Clinton says Trump has put steelworkers out of business by buying steel that China has dumped in the United States. She says she would promote a variety of energy sources, including "clean energy" programs that can fight climate change.

— David Jackson

Supreme Court

An audience member asks about the Supreme Court.

Clinton says she wants justices "who understands the way the world really works."

She says she wants the court to maintain abortion rights and marriage equality, while Trump backs judges who would reverse those rulings.

Trump noted that the next president will be able to change the court, starting with the replacement of the late Justice Antonin Scalia. He talks about the importance of the Second Amendment.

— David Jackson

Divided nation — and election

As it began, this debate is ending on a bitter note.

Trump again hit Clinton for her "deplorables" comment, saying: "Believe me — she has tremendous hate in her heart ... she's got tremendous hatred."

Asked whether Trump has the temperament to be president, Clinton said, "no."

"I'm shocked to hear that," Trump replied.

— David Jackson

All the people

Trump is asked: Can you be president of ALL of the people?

"Absolutely," Trump says, taking the opportunity to hit Clinton over her comment that half of Trump supporters belong in a "basket of deplorables."

Trump also says he will help the inner cities, something Clinton and the Democrats only talk about doing.

Clinton talks about her 30 years in public service and says she wants to help all Americans "find a place" in the country — something some people fear about her opponent.

"Maybe they wouldn't have a place in Donald Trump's America," Clinton says.

Clinton says she regrets her deplorables comment: "My argument isn't with his supporters — it's with him."

— David Jackson

Syria — and Russia

What to do about the Syrian civil war — and the refugees?

Clinton says the situation is "catastrophic" and attacks Russia for its activity in Syria. She proposed a no-fly zone and safe zones in the country, and closer cooperation with allies on the ground — save Russia, which she again says wants Trump to win the presidency.

Trump accuses Clinton of Syria policies adopted AFTER she left the State Department.

Clinton "talks tough," Trump says, but she and the Obama administration have created "messes" in the Middle East.

Trump also defends Russia, saying it wants to kill ISIS — and, for good measure, publicly disagrees with running mate Mike Pence's criticism of Russia.

Says Trump: "He and I haven't spoken, and I disagree."

— David Jackson

Trump, the lurker?

While the format allows movement by the candidates around the stage, some of the movements by Trump lurking behind Clinton as she answered questions were just well, weird.

Trump points to someone off camera as Clinton talks #debatepic.twitter.com/ECOUMtrlHW — Mashable GIF (@mashablegif) October 10, 2016

Trump is just creepin' around the stage now #debatepic.twitter.com/MajNvjuFZX — Mashable GIF (@mashablegif) October 10, 2016

He's physically trying to intimidate her by standing right behind her this is cray #debate — Sarah Silverman (@SarahKSilverman) October 10, 2016

what is going on pic.twitter.com/V1oHeMPYe2 — andrew kaczynski (@KFILE) October 10, 2016

— Donovan Slack

Throwdown on taxes

Trump says he will reduce taxes and eliminate loopholes that benefit him — giving Clinton a chance to hit him over reports he may not have paid federal income taxes for nearly two decades.

Trump also seems to confirm a New York Times report that he used a massive income loss in 1995 to write off taxes for years — a provision many Clinton supporters have also used.

The New York businessman says he understands the tax laws better than any other candidate.

Trump says Clinton will raise taxes, but Clinton says he is lying because "he lives in an alternative reality."

Clinton says her tax plan will benefit the middle class, while Trump is looking out for the rich.

"Donald always takes care of Donald and people like Donald," she says.

The two also argued again over taxes and Clinton's career. "Here we go again," Clinton said at one point.

— David Jackson

The Russia case

Clinton uses a question to raise questions about Trump's relations with Russia, and its alleged efforts to influence the election — and adds that he should release his tax returns to show if he has business relations with the Russians.

Trump calls Clinton's claims "ridiculous" and says Clinton is upset because leaked documents show she has lied.

And, no, he won't release his tax returns until after an audit, Trump says.

— David Jackson

A Muslim question

A Muslim voter asks about discrimination.

Trump said Islamophobia is "a shame," but the nation does face threats from "radical Islamic terror." He defends increased scrutiny of Muslim immigrants.

"Whether we like it or not, there is a problem," Trump says.

Clinton hammers Trump for "divisive, dark things" he has said about Muslims and said his "demagogic rhetoric" undermines cooperation with Muslim nations, helping terrorists.

On a follow-up, Trump said his proposed Muslim ban has now "morphed" into what he calls "extreme vetting" of migrants.

Clinton said migrants are in fact heavily screened, and the U.S. should take in more Syrian refugees from a "horrific war."

Clinton hits Trump on his proposed Muslim ban, saying the U.S. should not have a "religious test."

— David Jackson

Obamacare — and intimidation

After a health care question, Clinton explains her position — with Trump standing behind her, mugging her answers.

Clinton criticizes Trump's plan to repeal Obamacare, saying that would eliminate all of its good features.

Trump responds: "Obamacare is a disaster — we all know it." He pitches a more decentralized health care plan, while saying Clinton wants a "single payer" plan totally run by the federal government.

Clinton is called upon to defend her husband, ex-president Bill Clinton, over his comment that Obamacare is a "crazy system."

She said the ex-president "clarified what he meant" and that they want to fix problems in the system but keep the basics intact.

Says Trump: "Everything is broken about it."

— David Jackson

It's apparent this will be the nastiest debate in presidential history ...

Clinton says it's a good thing that someone with Trump's temperament won't have control of law enforcement.

Trump shot back: "Because you'd be in jail."

Clinton again calls her private email system a mistake but says she has been careful with classified information.

Trump calls Clinton a liar and adds: "You should be ashamed of yourself."

Clinton tells Trump he only wants to change the subject: "I know you're into big diversion tonight."

— David Jackson

Shut it down!

The audience, which had been instructed by moderator Martha Raddatz to keep quiet, couldn’t seem to help itself, but Raddatz was having none of it.

Trump has been arguing with the debate moderators all night. At one point, in a retort to Anderson Cooper, Trump described the debate as "one on three."

— Donovan Slack and David Jackson

The birther issue comes up

Clinton hits Trump for the "racist lie" about President Obama's birthplace and says he owes the president an apology.

Trump suggests — without evidence — that Clinton started the birther movement, and she owes the apology.

For good measure, Trump says he will appoint a special prosecutor to investigate Clinton's private emails.

Clinton responds: "Everything thing he said is absolutely false — but I'm not surprised."

— David Jackson

The Trump tape

Anderson Cooper goes there, asking Trump about the newly released tape.

Trump denies the suggestion he was endorsing sexual assault. He again apologizes for his comments but downplays them as "locker room talk."

He adds: "I have great respect for women — nobody respects women more than I do."

Clinton also gets the question, and she says the tape again proves Trump is unfit for the presidency. "Donald Trump is different," she says, and the tape proves Trump is a man who doesn't like or respect women, not to mention immigrants, Muslims and others.

"Yes, this is who Donald Trump is," she said.

Trump replies to Clinton's attack: "It's just words, folks, just words." He attacks Clinton's record as U.S. senator, and is cut off — much to his annoyance.

Trump goes there after another tape question, going after both of the Clintons.

"Bill Clinton was abusive to women," Trump said. "Hillary Clinton attacked those women."

Clinton said Trump made many false statements but can run his campaign however he sees fit.

As for her: "When they go low, you go high."

She also pointed out that Trump never apologizes for his transgressions.

— David Jackson

Yep, it’s all about Trump

As the debate started, the folks over at Facebook culled the topics received the most buzz on the site, and here’s how they stack up.

1. Trump Tape

2. Wikileaks Release

3. Crime & Criminal Justice

4. Government Ethics

5. Iraq, Syria & ISIS

— Donovan Slack

Good behavior

Right off the bat, a town hall questioner asks about the negative behavior in the campaign.

Clinton goes the high way, saying she has "a very positive and optimistic view" of the country, and wants to "heal' it.

Trump says "I actually agree with that" — and, while subdued, goes after "horrible things" like Obamacare, the Iran nuclear agreement and bad trade deals.

No personal attack yet on Clinton (or her husband), however.

— David Jackson

No handshake

The candidates did not shake hands — it's going to be that kind of night. Reaction was mixed:

No handshake between candidates at a presidential debate is an unfortunate summary of the state of our politics today. — Kevin Madden (@KevinMaddenDC) October 10, 2016

No handshake and whole media center erupts in "Woooooooah!" — Paul Singer (@singernews) October 10, 2016

Focus group did NOT like Hillary Clinton leaving Trump hanging on the opening handshake. #Debate — Frank Luntz (@FrankLuntz) October 10, 2016

— David Jackson and Donovan Slack

Trump ad reveals go-it-alone strategy

During the debate, a pop-up ad on conservative Breitbart.com appears to reflect the candidate’s strategy at this point, trying to build on his anti-establishment candidacy and cult of personality.

Trump's new ad out Sunday night ahead of the debate. (Photo11: Screenshot)

— Donovan Slack

This is, um, unusual debate prep

Trump, flanked by Bill Clinton accusers, invited reporters to a short press availability before the debate:

Cooper Allen has the full story on what appears to be a scorched earth strategy by Trump. The group is in the debate audience tonight as well:

Women accusers of Bill Clinton sitting in front row of debate invited by Donald Trump... #2016 pic.twitter.com/3jhQW3FcKm — Alex Moe (@AlexNBCNews) October 10, 2016

Trump's campaign manager followed up the press availability with another broadside against Clinton. She linked to a tweet last year in which Hillary Clinton said "Every survivor of sexual assault deserves to be heard, believed, and supported."

We agree @HillaryClinton. Does that go for Juanita, Kathleen, Kathy and Paula? If so, acknowledge them from the stage tonight. #girlpowerhttps://t.co/hqvij2DPjA — Kellyanne Conway (@KellyannePolls) October 10, 2016

The Clinton campaign suggested in a statement from spokeswoman Jennifer Palmieri that their candidate is not be rattled.

“We’re not surprised to see Donald Trump continue his destructive race to the bottom," Palmieri said. "Hillary Clinton understands the opportunity in this town hall is to talk to voters on stage and in the audience about the issues that matter to them, and this stunt doesn’t change that. If Donald Trump doesn’t see that, that’s his loss. As always, she’s prepared to handle whatever Donald Trump throws her way.”

Numerous Republicans asked (warned) Trump not to bring up sexual allegations against ex-president Bill Clinton during tonight's debate; Trump appears to have ignored that advice.

As a rising number of Republicans call on him to exit the race, Trump seems very much on his own.

— Donovan Slack and David Jackson

The first NSFW debate?

America apparently won’t have to wait long — the first set of questions tonight will be about the Trump tape, the recording that has the political world all atwitter and Republicans withdrawing support for their nominee in droves.

CNN, whose Anderson Cooper is co-moderating with Martha Raddatz of ABC News, reports both candidates will be asked about the 2005 recording, in which Trump was caught on a hot microphone speaking vulgarly about pushing himself on women.

"While everything is subject to change until air time, an ABC source said — perhaps confirming the obvious — that Trump and Clinton will both be prompted to address the matter. "A coin toss by the Commission on Presidential Debates determined that Clinton will speak first."

The format will be a town hall, with an audience of undecided voters chosen by Gallup also asking questions. The subjects will be "topics of broad public interest." So basically anything goes.

The prospect of gutter topics dominating a presidential debate for the first time had more than a few folks on Twitter discussing whether children should be allowed to watch.

If you're a parent in America right now hoping to teach your kid about democracy, how young is too young to watch tonight? #debate — Rebecca Donaway (@rebeccadonaway) October 9, 2016

My son wants to watch the debate with us tonight. He's 8. I can't even explain the zillion reasons why this isn't a good idea...SO SAD. — Johanna💃🏻 Carrillo (@yoyicarrillo) October 9, 2016

Son asked to watch the debate with me.



As a political scientist: I want the next generation to appreciate politics.



I can’t let him watch. — Dr. Michael Bitzer (@BowTiePolitics) October 9, 2016

I'm old enough to remember when parents allowed their children to watch presidential debates. — Guy Raz (@guyraz) October 9, 2016

​— Donovan Slack

Trump > Brangelina?

Speaking of broad public interest, it seems more people have heard about the Trump tape, which was released Friday, than they have about the divorce of Hollywood “it” couple Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie or the new iPhone for that matter, according to a Politico/Morning Consult poll.

Awareness of the tape is tied, though, with that of Clinton’s near-collapse from pneumonia.

More Americans have already heard of the Trump video leak than of Pokemon Go, Brangelina divorce or iPhone 7. #2016 pic.twitter.com/424JPl4SM5 — Sadanand Dhume (@dhume) October 9, 2016

At the end of the day, that same poll found the tape may not be shaking the foundations of Trump’s support as much as many pundits have predicted.

If the election were held today, Clinton would win 42%-38%. That’s relatively unchanged from a Politico/Morning Consult poll a few days ago that found her leading 41%-39%.

As for all those Republicans abandoning Trump? That may not be what the party faithful wants:

• 74% of Republicans surveyed said party leaders should stand by Trump

• 41% said they would be more likely to support a candidate who continues to back Trump

The true fallout of the Trump tape remains to be seen. And the race will no doubt be affected by tonight’s debate.

​— Donovan Slack

Meanwhile, in the spin room…

AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka notes an unfortunate misspelling on a sign designed to identify surrogates. (He’s with Clinton.)

This is definitely a typo. There’s no Trump in Trumka #washudebate2016pic.twitter.com/8OuBJ26Zni — Richard L. Trumka (@RichardTrumka) October 9, 2016

— Donovan Slack

Trump rips ‘self-righteous hypocrites’

The Republican nominee is clearly angry at the elected officials, including more than a dozen Republican senators, who have withdrawn support for him since the release of the tape on Friday.

Tremendous support (except for some Republican "leadership"). Thank you. — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) October 9, 2016

So many self-righteous hypocrites. Watch their poll numbers - and elections - go down! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) October 9, 2016

Trump also tweeted a story by conservative Breitbart News about women calling Clinton an enabler of her husband’s sexual misdeeds, offering a glimpse of a potential line of attack tonight (see pre-debate event with Clinton accusers above).

He traveled to St. Louis with Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus and former New York mayor Rudy Giuliani, and he has been in contact today with running mate and Indiana Gov. Mike Pence, who condemned the tape but is so far sticking with Trump:

​— Donovan Slack

Hillary’s silent game plan

The Democratic nominee could unleash a firestorm on Trump over the tape tonight, but she and her camp appear to be holding their fire for now.

Clinton campaign staying very quiet today no surrogates dispatched to spin room, on Tuesday they had someone every hour — Eliza Collins (@elizacollins1) October 9, 2016

Heidi Przybyla has the scoop from St. Louis, where she reports that Clintonland wants to “keep the media spotlight on an erupting war within the GOP, and for maximum effect as she condemns Trump in front of one of the biggest live television audiences of the campaign cycle.”

“The Clinton campaign believes the timing of the release of the tape, two days before the second presidential forum at Washington University, is fortuitous because it allows Clinton to deliver her response early in the debate when most viewers are tuned in, according to a campaign official.

President Obama, meanwhile, is not pulling any punches, telling the audience at a Chicago fundraiser Sunday that he wouldn’t repeat Trump’s comments.

“There’s children in the room,” he said, adding that Trump has been "demeaning women, degrading women, but also minorities, immigrants, people of other faiths. Mocking the disabled. Insulting our troops, insulting our veterans.

"That tells you a couple things," Obama said. "It tells you that he’s insecure enough that he pumps himself up by putting other people down. Not a character trait that I would advise for somebody in the Oval Office."

He arrived back in Washington shortly before 7 p.m. and was mum on plans for this evening.

Pres Obama returns to WH this evening in time for Pres Debate (or Giants/Packers game). pic.twitter.com/cP57U5gMxq — Mark Knoller (@markknoller) October 9, 2016

​— Donovan Slack

What do Americans actually want to hear about?

On PresidentialOpenQuestions.com, where Americans submitted and voted on which questions they want the moderators to ask tonight, there are some clear favorites. Tonight's moderators have said they would consider asking questions from the site. Here’s the top five questions as of 7 p.m. ET:

1. How will you ensure the 2nd amendment is protected? (147,816 votes)

"Too much crime is blamed on the tool, not the person. How will you protect law abiding citizens to protect themselves."

2. Would you support requiring criminal background checks for all gun sales? (131,955)

"My son was murdered by someone who should have never had a gun. Gaps in our current system make it easy for felons & other dangerous people to buy guns online & at gun shows, no questions asked."

3. Do you support expanding, and not cutting, Social Security's modest benefits? (46,551)

"We can easily afford to protect & expand Social Security by requiring the wealthiest Americans to contribute at the same rate as the rest of us."

4. As president, what are the steps you will take to address climate change? (46,110)

"Climate change is the greatest existential threat facing the country and the world today. What are three things you will do as President to address the challenges posed by a warming planet?"

5. Would you act to repeal Citizens United? (44,462)

"Take the insane amount of money out of the election process."

— Donovan Slack

#TrumpTapes killing it on social

Data from the folks at Google shows Trump led searches of the two major-party candidates with 81%, compared with Clinton’s 19% over the past 24 hours.

Of the phrase “Donald Trump on _______” the word “women” was the most searched word. “Howard Stern” came in second and “Tiger Woods” came in third.

Aside from Friday’s tape, CNN posted audio on Saturday of Trump’s conversations with Stern, the shock-jock. The conversations touched on a variety of topics, but Trump described women (including his own daughter) in vulgar terms. One of the topics discussed was Tiger Woods’ marital infidelities.

Since Friday, the controversy has garnered 28.2 million posts, likes and shares by 8.5 million users on Facebook. And over on Twitter, users tweeted the hashtag #TrumpTapes more than 1 million times.

It is the second-most-talked-about moment of the election this year on Twitter. The most talked about (so far) was the first presidential debate.

— Eliza Collins

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2ehbs9X