It’s that time of the month again, I got my latest Loot Crate and am about to phone in a blog piece about all the cool crap that was inside! Yes! I’m getting into that sweet spot of being a Loot Crate subscriber where I am sort of forgetting that I’m subscribed and the package showing up feels more and more like a random present.

February’s theme was “PLAY” so we all probably figured on getting some game related stuff or something. It’s a pretty broad little theme here and honestly, the contents of the crate really take some liberties with how they tie in to the theme. I guess they can’t really call the theme “Cool Stuff” because then we’d all be calling them on it. Anyhow, as always, let’s take a look at what we got: Rock-Paper-Scissor Dice

You know what the hard part about rock-paper-scissors is? Deciding which of the three options to throw! If you’re the “always pick rock” type then the RPS-Dice just might be for you. A black and a white die with 2 of each of the three possible options. Rock. Paper. Scissors. Ok, I will admit that I was oddly excited when I popped open the little dice bag since as a roleplayer I’m always looking to have zany new dice to show off for some street cred. I was like “Oh cool! Rock-paper-scissor dice!”. It took me only a few moments to realize how useless these things were though. Maybe if there was more of a game than a game you can easily play without the assistance of a set of dice? I dunno man.

Rating: ♥ ♥

Pacman Mini-Poster

Me: “What’s this little tube?” Sarah: “It’s a poster” Me: “But maybe it’s a game!” Sarah: “It’s a poster”. Sure enough, poster. A cool little poster mind you, but maybe I was still hoping for some sort of a game to go along with the rock-paper-scissor dice. The design here is pretty cool, a “blown apart” blue print of a PacMan cartridge. I need to fight some serious battles to put anything up on the walls in the apartment, but I think this little guy is destined for my cubicle at the office.

Rating: ♥ ♥ ♥ Ready Player One – By Ernest Cline

If you are a 9to5 (dot cc) veteran than you know that I have already read and loved this book. To the point where I originally planned on re-visiting many of the pop-culture references that Cline employs in his story. I will admit, I stopped after embarking on an epic quest through the Tomb of Horrors but still, the book was awesome. I only had the digital copy so this will likely be destined to be a re-gift but hey, I really like the inclusion of books in Loot Crate and if this is the kinda book they’ll be sending me then I am down with that. The only reason this isn’t a full 5 stars is because I’ve already read the book. You should too. Also, I love the cover illustration of the Stacks.

Rating: ♥ ♥ ♥ ♥ SuperFight Loot Crate Exclusive Deck

This was a super sweet pull for me. I have actually been considering picking up a copy of Superfight for a while now and the only thing that’s really been holding me back is whether or not I want to spend an evening arguing with my friends over geeky crap (I already do that on 9ES). If you don’t know how Superfight works, you and your opponent draw cards then you match up a white and a black to make your champion. Blue and purple cards can be added into the mix in variations. You then have an argument over who would win and the rest of the players vote. The champion stays on and the next player tries to come up with a combination to beat them. So in this randomly generated encounter, a Derby Girl who can only be killed by a stake through the heart faces off against Godzilla who throws water balloons filled with acid. The fight takes place deep in the amazon rainforest and neither fighter can see or hear. Go! Kickass, right? Right. Double kickass that it’s a Loot Crate exclusive deck so if I decide to buy then I have cards that you won’t! Muahaha.

Rating: ♥ ♥ ♥ ♥ ♥ Promo Code for the Firefly Game

Ok, this is a thing I have for a game I don’t play. Yay! I assume it’s cool if you play Firefly?

Rating: ♥

HexBug

This doesn’t really hold any interest for me, but I think it will make an excellent gift. Sadly, since I intend to gift it I may never know exactly how much joy this could have brought into my life.

Rating: ♥ ♥

The box turns into a board game!

Hurray! My wish was granted! There’s a game that you can play with the RPS-dice! Oh. Wait. You just go around the board and pick stuff up and first player to get the stuff wins? Bah. This is basically just a roll the dice and move forward game. Would’ve been cooler if there was a little more of a game in this game.

Rating: ♥

Blank Mini Munny

Ok, I love vinyl figs. I’ve got a pretty big collection of these dudes and the “colour your own” have always appealed to me even though I am not artistically inclined at all. Thankfully, the washable markers make it possible for me to be the worst at art and then just run water over the figurine and set it back to normal! Hurray! This is dope and the little Munny guy will probably get some action whenever someone comes over or when I’m bored. My only slight beef is that the washable markers are a little too washable, coming off on your fingers as you colour. Meh, you can’t win ’em all.

Rating: ♥ ♥ ♥ ♥

And for a bonus, here is Sarah’s first creation, she created the Munny Joker-Henchman:

Keith does all sorts of things here on 9to5.cc, he works with the other founders on 9to5 (illustrated), co-hosts our two podcasts: The 9to5 Entertainment System and Go Plug Yourself and blogs here as The Perspicacious Geek.