An executive editor at the Huffington Post attacked singer and actress Demi Lovato last week for refusing to talk about her sexuality in public.

In an article, Noah Michelson attacked Lovato, claiming it was “total bullshit” that the singer wouldn’t discuss her sexuality.

I love Demi Lovato, but her reason for refusing to talk about her sexuality is total bullshit. Here's why: https://t.co/yhnGznv7jt — noah michelson (@noahmichelson) September 20, 2017

“As someone who’s never had to endure the kind of scrutiny or judgment celebrities do, I can only begin to imagine how daunting it must be to have strangers constantly scrounging for whatever juicy personal tidbits they can dig up or coerce you to cough up. But, still, I am respectfully going to call bullshit on Lovato’s answer,” wrote Michelson. “The only way that I can make sense of any of this is that Lovato only wants to keep her sexuality private ― not her love life, not who she’s dating, not her relationships. And that’s a problem.”

“I don’t even have to look at the comments section of this piece to know that there are probably already angry folks telling me that I’m ‘bullying’ Lovato and that someone’s sexuality is ‘no one else’s business’ or asking ‘who cares?’ or ‘why does it matter?’ But it does matter,” he continued. “The longer she refuses to talk about this one specific aspect of who she is ― while continually telling the queer community that we should be proud of who we are and simultaneously courting us to buy her albums and concert tickets ― the less I’m inclined to want her support… or to support her.”

In response to Michelson’s article, Lovato called the Huffington Post Queer Executive Editor “expectant and rude,” before telling him to “watch my documentary and chill out.”

Expectant and rude. Watch my documentary and chill out. — Demi Lovato (@ddlovato) September 20, 2017

“Just because [I] refuse to label myself for the sake of a headline doesn’t mean I’m not going to stand up for what I believe in,” Lovato continued in a series of tweets. “If you’re that curious about my sexuality, watch my documentary. But I don’t owe anybody anything.”

Just because I'm refuse to label myself for the sake of a headline doesn't mean I'm not going to stand up for what I believe in. — Demi Lovato (@ddlovato) September 20, 2017

If you're that curious about my sexuality, watch my documentary. But I don't owe anybody anything. — Demi Lovato (@ddlovato) September 20, 2017

Lovato has previously told critics to “chill the fuck out,” and declared, “I think we live in a world today where no matter what you do, you’re doing something wrong, whether it’s cultural appropriation or it’s being insensitive to certain groups of people.”

“We just live in that age where everything we do is wrong and, unfortunately, everyone’s looking for a reason to have their voices heard, and sometimes it’s not always in the most positive way,” she continued.

Charlie Nash covers technology and LGBT news for Breitbart News. You can follow him on Twitter @MrNashington and Gab @Nash, or like his page at Facebook.