Donald Trump Donald John TrumpHouse committee believes it has evidence Trump requested putting ally in charge of Cohen probe: report Vietnamese airline takes steps to open flights to US on sidelines of Trump-Kim summit Manafort's attorneys say he should get less than 10 years in prison MORE's campaign chairman on Sunday slammed Hillary Clinton Hillary Diane Rodham ClintonSanders: 'I fully expect' fair treatment by DNC in 2020 after 'not quite even handed' 2016 primary Sanders: 'Damn right' I'll make the large corporations pay 'fair share of taxes' Former Sanders campaign spokesman: Clinton staff are 'biggest a--holes in American politics' MORE's vice presidential pick, contrasting the Democratic and Republican presidential tickets.

ADVERTISEMENT

"Bernie Sanders Bernard (Bernie) SandersPush to end U.S. support for Saudi war hits Senate setback Sanders: 'I fully expect' fair treatment by DNC in 2020 after 'not quite even handed' 2016 primary Sanders: 'Damn right' I'll make the large corporations pay 'fair share of taxes' MORE is the one who should be concerned because, yes, Tim Kaine Timothy (Tim) Michael KaineTrump claims Democrats ‘don’t mind executing babies after birth’ after blocked abortion bill Democrats block abortion bill in Senate Trump unleashing digital juggernaut ahead of 2020 MORE doesn't represent the progressive agenda of Sanders," Paul Manafort said on "Fox News Sunday."

"And once again the progressives in the Democratic Party have been cheated by the establishment. But then the WikiLeaks, leaks of Democratic emails over the last week, prove that that was always the plan."

A trove of emails was released by WikiLeaks last week that show top officials at the Democratic National Committee appearing to plan ways to undermine Bernie Sanders's presidential campaign.

Manafort said Sunday that Sen. Tim Kaine (D-Va.) is the "ultimate status quo" choice and a "failed career politician." He added that Kaine has never held a job in the private sector and has no idea how to create jobs.

"We're the change candidate," Manafort added.

"Clinton and Kaine are the failed establishment candidates. Their record is what we're fighting against. And for them to say that they're going to bring change when all the problems are part of what was created during the Obama administration, frankly, is ludicrous."