0 Race may be factor in fatal stabbing of JBLM soldier

LAKEWOOD, Wash. - Lakewood police are looking for five black men in their mid 20s after a 20-year-old Joint Base Lewis-McChord soldier was stabbed to death early Saturday morning, police said. Friends have identified the victim as 20-year-old Tevin Geike.

The stabbing happened after 2:30 a.m. in a parking lot in the 12500 block of Pacific Highway Southwest.

According to authorities, a vehicle passed by three active duty JBLM soldiers and yelled something about being "white." One of the soldiers then yelled back something about the men treating combat solider with disrespect.

The car turned around and stopped next to the soldiers.

Police said five men got out of the car, surrounded the soldiers and a verbal confrontation started between the two groups.

The driver called the other men back to the car when he realized the men really were combat soldiers.

According to police, as the group returned to the vehicle, one of the men bumped into Tevin Geike . His friends saw him fall to the ground as the car drove away. He’d been stabbed.

Police say say the victim had multiple stab wounds. He died from his injuries at the scene.

Glenn Zimmerman was friends with Geike. He left a rosary near the murder scene on Saturday.

“I want to find the people that did it so bad. He was only 20 years old,” said Zimmerman.

“What was it all over, just cause they were some white boys?” he added.

Zimmerman said Geike was about to be discharged from the Army. He was getting ready to move off base in 5 days.

He’s remembering Geike for his service and his friendship. “He was a kind hearted person and he was just a really good friend. I hope everyone remembers him for the smile he had on his face,” said Zimmerman.

Police described the main suspect in his early 20s, about 6 feet 1 inch tall, medium build and wearing a blue zip up. The driver was described as 5 feet 7 inches tall, short cropped hair and wearing a blue and white horizontal striped shirt. One man was described as 5 feet 7 inches tall, short hair and wearing a gray tank top. Another man was described as 5 feet 6 inches to 5 feet 7 inches tall, wearing camouflage pants (described as paintball splats). The fifth man is described as 5 feet 6 inches tall.

Police are now looking for the five black men and their vehicle is described as a midnight blue BMW sedan or VW Jetta with four doors, tinted windows, stock rims and low-profile tires.

Anyone with information is urged to call the Lakewood Police Department.