RUSSIAN media is less than impressed by Tony Abbott and his aggressive talk towards their president, Vladimir Putin.

Prime Minister Tony Abbott has been pummelled with a barrage of personal insults for his tough talk over Russia’s part in the MH17 disaster.

News website Pravda, widely considered a mouthpiece for the Russian Government, has slammed Abbott as “rude, insolent, insulting, impolite, impertinent, unpolished, gross, unpleasant and downright impudent” in a particularly harsh opinion piece.

The stinging rebuke came before Mr Abbott’s foot-in-mouth moment yesterday when he threatened to “shirt-front” Mr Putin at the upcoming G20 leaders summit in Brisbane.

Mr Abbott’s comment was sparked by his anger over Russia’s support for separatists who shot down the Malaysia Airlines flight in eastern Ukraine, killing 298 people including 38 Australian residents.

RELATED: Abbott should be scared shirtless of Putin

“I’m going to shirt-front Mr Putin. You bet you are (sic), you bet I am. I’m going to be saying to Mr Putin, ‘Australians were murdered. They were murdered by Russian-backed rebels using Russian-supplied equipment’,” Mr Abbott told reporters yesterday.

(For the record, “shirt-front” is a footballing term that can either mean to grab someone by the collar, or shove someone to the ground.)

The acid-tongued opinion piece on Pravda, entitled “Tony Abbott: The chip on Australia’s shoulder”, was authored by commentator Timothy Bancroft-Hinchey.

“I would advise Russia’s President Vladimir Putin to wash his hands carefully and sterilise them after shaking the paw offered to him by Australia’s Prime Minister Tony Abbott at the forthcoming G20 Summit in Brisbane. It is not about Ebola Virus Disease, it is about the disease called insolence and Australia’s colonial chip on its shoulder,” he wrote.

In reference to Mr Abbott’s comment that he understood why people wouldn’t want him to shake Putin’s hand at the G20, Bancroft-Hinchey wrote: “Tony Abbott displays a degree of insolence, arrogance and incompetence which mirrors the intrusiveness, belligerence and chauvinism inherent in other members of the Anglo Saxon alliance in NATO.”

He goes on to reject the idea that Russia played any part in the downing of MH17, dismissing the allegation as “bulls**t”.

The strange opinion piece goes to great lengths to say that the “good people of Australia” are not well represented by Mr Abbott. The proof? One need only look to Neighbours for its “community-based family-oriented people “ or MasterChef, where “the judges are nice to the contestants and teach them instead of insulting them and making them feel inadequate”.

“Mr Abbott does not represent Australia or Australians. Period,” Bancroft-Hinchey concludes.