If you are still in two minds about booking a vacation this winter to South India, here are some interesting facts that might make you reconsider your travel plans; for Andhra Pradesh will say 'atithi devo bhava' and welcome you in a way that might be a pure stroke of serendipity.

And guess what? A village in Andhra is the only place in the southern region that snows!

Cool wind keeps the hillock cool and foggy. Picture Courtesy:Twitter/traveldglobe Cool wind keeps the hillock cool and foggy. Picture Courtesy:Twitter/traveldglobe

Lambasingi is a misty hill station located at an altitude of 1025 metres above sea level in the Chintapalli region of Arakku Valley. The place is also known as Korra Bayalu, which literally means, "if someone stays out in the open they would freeze like a stick!". Temperatures may not go below 0 degree Celsius every year, but when it does, the hill treats you with the most beautiful snowfall.

Also Read: 15 pictures that will make you want to become a globetrotter

What adds to the charm is that while the hill station is sparsely populated, it's home to an isolated tribal community that is engaged in pepper and coffee plantations.

APTDC is promoting ecotourism in Lambasingi. Picture Courtesy:Twitter/bharath747 APTDC is promoting ecotourism in Lambasingi. Picture Courtesy:Twitter/bharath747

Replete with picturesque valleys, rich natural beauty coupled with chilling temperatures, Lambasingi is being developed as an upcoming offbeat eco-tourism destination. The Andhra Pradesh Tourism Development Corporation (APTDC) is also making efforts to open a state-run resort with luring travel packages to welcome tourists. In fact, there has been an increase in the footfall statistics of late, owing to its proximity to Vishakhapatnam and other nearby tourist attractions.

Temperature ranges between 0-10 degree Celsius in winter. Picture Courtesy:Instagram/srinath.77 Temperature ranges between 0-10 degree Celsius in winter. Picture Courtesy:Instagram/srinath.77

Reports reveal that Lambasingi enjoyed its last snowfall back in 2012. But who knows? You might just get lucky this year!