You may have heard from friends and acquaintances or have read from online articles and medical related infomagazines how chiropractic helps a lot of people who suffer from chronic headaches or migraines, back pain, neck pain, shoulder pain, and other posture related problems; how it provides them with relief and remedy for those painful and distressing conditions. You may even know people within your close knit circle who spread the gospel of chiropractic healing, because they themselves have personally experienced its soothing and relieving effect.

Indeed, chiropractic has more than enough testimonials to entice you that alternative medicine may not be “alternative” to some people, but a regular and habitual sought-after treatment. These testimonials from ordinary people have given the practice of chiropractic the necessary yet natural way of marketing to make it mainstream. However, there are celebrities and, in particular, famous athletes who preach about how chiropractic enables them to spike up the level of their performance for any endeavour they do in their career and personal living.

The ultimate woman warrior of MMA (Mixed Martial Arts) and UFC female fighter, Ronda Rousey, mentions about how her strength and agility are maintained by chiropractic care. Let us hear it from Lady Rowdy herself…

A lot of the injuries that I get during training, I can count on my Chiropractor because he always helps me get better. Thanks a lot to Chiropractic!

Many of us know how Ms. Rousey had to put up against a number of strong and muscle built female fighters. Yet, with the performance boost from the caring hands of her chiropractor, she has them taken down on the floor. Way to go, Lady Rowdy!

[clear]Here is the thing, Ronda Rousey is not the only popular athlete who has chiropractic as a booster for physical performance and sports endurance. Allow me to give the space to these champions…



I suffered a blunt trauma hit to my thigh by skiing into a rock at high speed. My leg was swollen badly and I only had 15 degrees of movement in my knee. In the two days before our trip, [chiropractor] John helped me increase the movement and flexibility to 90 degrees with ART and other a stretching techniques. During the backcountry trip John paid special attention to my helping me increase my movement and manage the swelling. His excellent treatment made me realise that good chiropractic is not just about “cracking your back and neck.” John’s attention to detail and kind nature really allowed me to excel while injured and now my leg has made a full 100% recovery.

-Rex Pemberton, BASE jumper, extreme sports enthusiast, and youngest Australian ever to climb Mount Everest



I came to him [chiropractor, Dr. Mulholland] for assistance with a serious hamstring injury prior to the London Olympic Games. He was able, in a very short time frame, to speed the healing and recovery. His understanding of the human body and the needs of athletes is second to none. I really like his holistic approach that looks at the whole body rather than parts in isolation.

– Rebecca Wardell, Olympic Champion from New Zealand



I strongly believe that regular chiropractic adjustments enabled me to deal with the enormous physical stresses placed on my body during this time. Throughout my professional sporting career, obvious emphasis was placed on eating well and this is where I developed my enthusiasm for good nutrition.

– Daniel Irvine, Australian Rugby League Legend, nephew of “Great Ken” Irvine, and presently a Chiropractor



Lifting weights and seeing a chiropractor on a regular basis has made me a better golfer. I’ve been going to Chiropractors for as long as I can remember. It’s as important to my training as practicing my swing.

– Tiger Woods, Professional Golf Player and World Champion

So there you go! You have read from people who use physical endurance and bodily fitness to make a living and who have put their name in athletic stardom, how chiropractic helped and continuously assists them with their performance.

Lest we forget, the Number One basketball legend in our era has this to say…

References:

www.augerchiro.com, www.milwaukiechiropractic.com, www.sportandwellnesschiropractic.com, theidealathlete.com, www.irvinechiropractic.com.au, rexpemberton.com