Arby's Sells 50 Venison Sandwiches Per Hour in Nashville, Until They're All Gone

The new Arby's venison sandwich is incredibly popular in Nashville, with stores quickly selling out of the limited-edition meals.

Apparently, the market for the new Arby's venison sandwich was much bigger than the company anticipated. The restaurant rolled out the new venison sandwiches at select locations in Nashville, Tennessee, on November 1st.

The first store promptly sold out of the new sandwiches on the first day of the new promotion, selling over 250 of them in just five hours. This was despite limiting sales to two venison sandwiches per customer. A second store offering the new Arby's venison sandwich sold over 100 in just over an hour.

According to Arby's representative Luke DeRouen:

We stuck a nerve, in a good way, with hunters. Some people drove from an hour away to try it.

Due to USDA regulations, restaurants cannot sell wild game. For this reason, the new Arby's venison sandwich is made from free-range, farm-raised red deer from New Zealand. The 5.5-ounce cuts of top and bottom round steak are slow cooked in hot water for 3.5 hours and served with a Cabernet sauce seasoned with crushed juniper berries and crispy fried onions on top.

I don't know about you, but my mouth is watering just reading that.

The sandwich is part of a marketing campaign to promote Arby's "It's meats season" campaign (check out the video above to see what I mean) and is a natural extension of their "We have the meats" slogan. Clearly, they are trying to attract hunters as a demographic group. Though it's still early, it looks like that approach is working well for them.

Arby's venison sandwiches will soon be available in Atlanta, Wisconsin, and Minnesota.

Like what you see here? You can read more great hunting articles by John McAdams on his hunting blog. Follow him on Facebook ennhe Big Game Hunting Blog, Twitter @TheBigGameHunt and on Instagram The_Big_Game_Hunter.

oembed rumble video here

NEXT: IS THIS THE BEST BEAR HUNTING VIDEO YOU'VE EVER SEEN?