Quote

[–]Reddit4Play 4 points 3 days ago

Giving the thief that move led to some weird readngs where other characters couldn't hide,

I was reading this thread before I submitted any questions and this actually leads into one: as the fighter gets "Bend Bars, Lift Gates" as a move, what might you do if somebody else, you know, wants to bend bars and/or lift gates?

Filling it in as Defy Danger is an easy solution, but I'm not sure if the consequences for less than a 10+ I could come up with would actually be less favorable than those in the Fighter's move, and I feel like since that's something special the Fighter gets that the improvised version should somehow be less awesome. What would you do (or have you done) there?

permalinkparentpocket

[–]sage_latorra 4 points 3 days ago

Yeah, I've had the same concern with the fighter at times, but practically it hasn't been an issue that we've seen. I think this is because every single class has "Damage" written right there, bug and bold, so the ability to break shit is always on the table. Giving the Fighter the ability to break shit better doesn't stand out quite as much.

If someone else breaks something in a way that leads to Defy Danger, that's cool. The Fighter's got a built in advantage that they get to choose. The Fighter is in control of their power. As the bars strain, the fighter gets to choose what to prioritize. Someone else, on the other hand, is just given a choice from the GM. It's a choice still, but their options have been limited by the GM.

I was thinking over the same issue not long ago. Was tinkering with the idea of rolling 1d6+1d4 or even 2d4 instead of 2d6 on an improvised skill check.Luckily it was mentioned by Sage on reddit recently and I dropped my idea, because it's not too Dungeon World when you think about it.So I think that if the Cleric is brawny enough in the fiction /think Friar Tuck/ he should roll if he /with GMs help possibly/ comes up with the idea of how it is Defying Danger. Could be an old trauma or a recent wound that will tear a muscle even further/dislocate a joint or open and bleed, causing pain and maybe even damage if the Cleric puts too much effort into it. Could be the danger of raising the attention of guards or getting injured /and infected, hello sepsis/ with crude and rusty bars. Could be just the fact he's just going to be executed in the morning, I think.Now the GM can offer the Cleric the danger as a consequence and come up with another type of bad stuff /fighter's options, something you come up with/, presenting an ugly choice on 7-9. There should always be a real risk in such a situation - a risk the Cleric will have to consider before attempting to show that feat of strength thus Defyung Danger. And why not be happy for him if he rolls 10+ saving the day and not losing anything?As Sage says Fighter has easier time due to the fact he has at least some idea what are the risks and can pick and choose.