Leeds United manager Brian McDermott has backed Ross McCormack to hit 20 goals this season – and bounce back from his unexpected omission from the Scotland squad.

McDermott believes that McCormack is on course to produce the first 20-goal haul by a single player at Leeds since Luciano Becchio three years ago after taking his tally to eight in Saturday’s win over Yeovil Town.

The Scotland international scored twice in a 2-0 victory at Elland Road, extending his recent tally to four in five games.

McCormack’s finishes dried up in September, resulting in a six-match goalless streak, but he has returned to form in the past month and vindicated United’s decision to resist repeated offers for him from Middlesbrough during the summer.

Leeds committed heavily to the 27-year-old by tying him to a new four-year contract, putting pressure on McCormack to deliver goals throughout the Championship term.

The former Cardiff City and Rangers forward fell one short of 20 during his second season at Elland Road and asked if he expected him to reach that mark before May, McDermott said: “He can do it, no doubt about that, if we get Ross in the right positions.

“His first goal on Saturday was fantastic, a tough finish. It didn’t look like it on the day because he made it look easy. The second one was a great bit of skill, a fabulous goal.”

McCormack’s performance against Yeovil came 48 hours before the announcement of Scotland’s squad for friendlies against the United States and Norway later this month.

He was left out of the 25-man party named by Gordon Strachan, overlooked in favour of Jordan Rhodes, Steven Fletcher, Steven Naismith and Matt Phillips.

McCormack fought a long battle to regain a place in the Scotland set-up after falling out of favour under former coach Craig Levein, and Strachan described him as “unlucky” after naming his squad on Monday.

McDermott admitted that he was “very surprised” but said: “Ross texted me to tell and I just said ‘do your stuff, do your stuff again against Charlton on Saturday and do it for us.’ He’ll be in the squad again and not just in the squad - he’ll be in the team.”

DO YOU THINK ROSS MCCORMACK WILL BREAK THE 20 GOAL BARRIER THIS SEASON? Click here to register and have your say on the stories and issues that matter to you

The United boss also denied that it was an advantage for Leeds to have McCormack inactive during the forthcoming international break, saying: “I want what’s right for him and he wants to play for his country.

“I want him to do well and if he’s playing well for us then I’m sure he’ll get picked.”

against the United States and Norway later this month.

He was left out of the 25-man party named by Gordon Strachan, overlooked in favour of Jordan Rhodes, Steven Fletcher, Steven Naismith and Matt Phillips.

McCormack fought a long battle to regain a place in the Scotland set-up after falling out of favour under former coach Craig Levein, and Strachan described him as “unlucky” after naming his squad on Monday.

McDermott admitted that he was “very surprised” but said: “Ross texted me to tell and I just said ‘do your stuff, do your stuff again against Charlton on Saturday and do it for us.’ He’ll be in the squad again and not just in the squad – he’ll be in the team.”

The United boss also denied that it was an advantage for Leeds to have McCormack inactive during the forthcoming international break, saying: “I want what’s right for him and he wants to play for his country.

“I want him to do well and if he’s playing well for us then I’m sure he’ll get picked.”