no one else: When researchers looked at search and view data for Porn Hub, they found something that surprised head-up-your-ass left-wing media dogmaticians, but women like super violent porn that features multiple attackers, abject terror and lots of force ! Women don’t just want to see sex. They want to see sex that includes ‘painful anal crying’, ‘public disgrace’ and ‘extreme brutal gangbang’.

Well, hello there, Mohammed. Did you bring your friend Akbar, too?

It amuses me, truly, to see writers like Sophia Rahman (that’s an Arabic name that means ‘servant of the most merciful’, by the way) try to stagger and blubber their way through women’s perplexing and difficult to dislodge tendency to adore domination, power, control, mastery and men, all at the same time! It only takes Sophia three paragraphs to try to absolve women of even the slightest hint of accountability for their own illicit desires:

“ Researchers found that 52 percent of the women had fantasies about forced sex with a man, 32 percent about being raped and 28 percent about forced oral sex with a man. Overall, 62 percent of the women reported having had at least one fantasy around a forced sex act. The researchers then investigated if the women’s fantasies were indicative of “sexual blame avoidance”, a hypothesis that women socialised by our slut-shaming culture chose forced sex themes to negate feelings of shame and guilt.

Kudos to Sophia for having the capacity to at least write the truth, even as she struggles to understand it:

“ The opposite was found to be true. Women who reported being less repressed about sex were more likely to have rape fantasies, more open to fantasy in general, more likely to have consensual fantasies and finally, they were found more likely to have high self-esteem.

Hmmmm. Women who think very highly of themselves enjoy fantasizing about men finding them, literally, irresistible? It’s so confusing.

If you had to pick the best-selling book in Britain of all time – since record-keeping began – what would you choose? The Bible? The Book of Common Prayer? Pride and Prejudice? Vera Britten’s Testament of Youth (fabulous book)? Harry Potter? The Wealth of Nations?

Try 50 Shades Of Grey.

“ Next time you’ll be in the cargo hold, bound and gagged in a crate.

An actual quote from the book . No, I haven’t read it, nor do I have any real desire to read it. Not my thing, quite frankly, although I begrudge no one their fantasy.

What I do begrudge everyone is reality.

Is it really any wonder that British women, who have worked so hard to utterly emasculate and castrate British men , are now voting to import Islamic savages who will quite happily bind them, gag them, gang-rape them and then kill them ? These stupid women do not realize their titillating fantasies translate into real life in an entirely different way with Muslim men. British men would like you to make tea and keep the house reasonably tidy while they work longer hours and earn most of the money. Muslim men would like to stone you for talking out of turn. Or talking at all.

Choose wisely, you stupid cows.

British women are not alone, by any means. Women all across the West have taken the men of the West, excoriated them, blamed them, screeched at them like rabid harpies , stripped them of every bit of cultural force and power they could manage, and then the women collapsed crying because they only have pussified man-boys to choose from for sexual and marriage partners.

Enter savage Mohammed and his gang of ‘refugee’ friends who are all, curiously, military aged men.

Plethysmography is a technical word for measuring bodily reactions in response to various stimuli. Daniel Bergner wrote a book called What Do Women Want: Adventures in the Science of Female Desire , and I am quite certain he would not be the slightest bit surprised that women love violent porn, love watching women sexually dominated and love the fantasy of being desired, no matter what the physical reality of that desire might entail. This is because Bergner looks at what happens to women’s vaginal responses (blood flow indicates arousal) when they are exposed to porn and other stimuli.

The plethysmograph doesn’t lie.

When Western women neuter Western men, and refuse to even attempt to understand their own innate desire for domination, to whatever degree any individual woman prefers (and almost all women prefer domination), we are left with immense, enormous unsated desires that are going to be expressed, one way or another, whether we like it or not.

Repression has never been a particularly effective social strategy.

What we get to choose is how women’s desire will be expressed.

I don’t want any shades of allahu akbar, thanks.

Lots of love,

JB