Bridgeway’s Two Preschool Homeschool Programs Make Learning Fun

Bridgeway offers two preschool homeschool curriculum options that promise to instill a love of learning. These upbeat stories and lessons, educational games and character-building themes are so much fun that your kids will be asking for more! Without even knowing it, they’re learning the foundations of reading and math!

Homeschooled preschool students learn Biblical themes while being introduced to academic skills like listening, speaking, reading readiness, writing, mathematics, social studies, and science.

Preschool Horizons

Engaging arts and crafts, music, story times and field trips are inspired by sweeping Biblical themes. Students learn the importance of God, Who is the beginning of all things.

In typical Bridgeway fashion, you can count on flexibility in our preschool homeschool program. You select the days you want to provide instruction (our programs are designed to accommodate a 3-5 day schedule). And wait until you see the curriculum: 180 lessons within two student books, two easy-to-follow teacher’s guides, a sing-along music CD, and a resource packet which contains basic flashcards and other manipulative methods. We know you’ll be amazed and your kids engaged.

Each day shifts between Bible, shapes, phonics, math, language arts, crafts, and even homework, bringing a wealth of new and exciting information that will engage young minds.

Through Bible-based lessons, preschool homeschool students will be introduced to social studies, language arts, math, phonics, science, health and safety, arts and crafts, music and physical education. The hands-on activities are perfect for little bodies, while concepts are reinforced through games, songs, poems and drama to prepare your preschool homeschool student for kindergarten games. 180 lessons will take you through the entire school year.

Homeschool Preschool with ACE and Christi

Our preschool homeschool program is designed to be easy to use. What’s involved? You simply have to follow the detailed teacher’s guide.

You’ll take your kids through letters and letter sounds, animals, basic science and social studies, numbers and mathematics.

What’s the key to the simplicity? Sixty colorful workbooks are packed with Bible and animal pictures, fun-to-do worksheets and full-color picture stories that encourage a love for reading. By the end of this program, your child will know all the phonetic sounds, making for an easy transition to reading. And perhaps most importantly, they’ll also learn about the amazing wonders of God’s love.

Either way you go, with Bridgeway’s preschool homeschooling program you’ll set the stage for your preschooler to fall in love with learning. If you ask us, there aren’t many things in life as fun as preschool homeschool. Want to ask us more? Our friendly staff welcomes your questions.

Just give us a call at 800-863-1474.