Cheap car insurance with dui in california?

i know drinking and driving was dumb and dont drink anymore for a year. i need car insurance where can i find the best deal something cheap for a whole year for liabilty for my shitty car.

ANSWER: I would recommend you to visit this internet site where one can get quotes from different companies: INSUREFOREVERYBODY.INFO

RELATED FAQS:

I am looking to buy a house. I need cheap house insurance. Where would I find this?

I am looking to buy a house. I need cheap house insurance. Where would I find this?





"What is the average price of insurance of a $15,000 car for a paramedic?"

21 years old , good credit rating works and goes to school, trading in 1998 jeep cherokee sport"





Which auto insurance companies only go back three months for accidents and violations?

Which auto insurance companies only go back three months for accidents and violations?





$9 car insurance in Yahoo sidebar ad.?

Going to the address gets blank page except for Your website is ready"". http://www.news9consumer.com/ . Go figure. No one will believe $9; it's a trap"





Where can i get affordable medical insurance?

I need to get affordable medical insurance for my wife and I. We both work and our jobs don't provide insurance. Any suggestions?





Cheapest car insurance for a single?

I'm 20 years of age and my parents said that having my name put on the insurance mean that there insurance will go from 800$ to 2500$. Now, I'm fairly clueless right now so I'll be doing my own research but what would you say is the best and cheapest insurance for a single male such as myself. Any recommendations?"





Any suggestions on how to lower my car insurance?

I'm an 18 year old female driver, and about a month ago I got into a bad car accident due to a malfunction. When this occurred, the insurance and everything else was under my dad's name. Now that I bought a new car, my dad wants everything to be under my name because he doesn't want to get screwed over"" with high insurance and such"





How much is the General car insurance?

I want the cheapest car insurance possible, I don't care about coverage."





I have cancelled my car insurance?

i live in england





How much do most people pay per month for life insurance?

no sale pitches please...





Affordable health insurance?

my company offers helath insurance for $300.00 a week. If I signed up for this I would end up bringing home 250.00 to support my family. IMPOSSIBLE! Where can I go to find more affordable helth insurance on my own for my family. I live in Massachusetts so it can not be a limited benifit plan. Any websites or phone numbers would be greatly appreciated. Thanks





How can I get affordable health insurance because of obama care?

I work but i have 2 kids to support and I Make Minimum Wage.. plus rent and bills.. Does anyone have any suggestions about how i could possibly get health care or what will happen if I just simply cant afford it? And no smart *** remarks like get a better paying job. Jobs are hard to find where I Live and i am making it with what i have. But obama forcing us to have health insurance is making me wonder what Options i have. Medicare? or some kind of afforable health insurance? would love to hear people who are in the same boat i am. and any POSITIVE Suggestion would be helpful. Thanks





How much does a moped cost?

I am looking into a cheap way to get around town and someone told me mopeds are pretty cheap. but i need to know how cheap. How much does a moped cost new? how much would gas cost me on average? what about license and registration? would i have to buy insurance and if so how much does that cost? links to a site that would tell me these things would be very helpful. thank you for your time. (i am an 18 year old female and this will be my first vehicle and first time driving anything, i don't know if that makes a difference)"





What is the best dental insurance without a waiting period for major services?

Need the best insurance individual dental plan without a waiting period for a root canal - would appreciate some recommendations. Not looking for the cheapest plan at all, just the best one, best coverage without a waiting period. Thanks"





Where can i find affordable life insurance for my 81 yr old granmother?

I live in Illinois, and I work for the UI, but im not sure if I can add my grandmother on my insurance...So Im trying to find somewhere that will take senior citizens, but something i can afford.."





Do you support Single Payer Health Insurance?

I have look examined our Health Care Crisis in this country quite alot for various school papers and what not. From my personal observations and my research it seems the best solution is to adopt more or less what Canada and most other industrialized nations have for health-care, which is a single-payer sort of system. Total coverage health insurance for everyone. Think about it: No deductibles, no insurance premiums, or people with-out health-care coverage, or those people tying up the emergency room and driving up costs because they cant afford to get there problem taken care of at a clinic. The system would be financed much the same way Medicare and Medicaid are. In fact these two systems are known to be much less expensive and wasteful then normal Insurance or even HMO's because the extra overhead for marketing and 6 figure CEO salaries is not there. Anybody have an opinion on this???"





Collecting on a life insurance policy?

My father, whom I haven't seen in years, died recently. According to the divorce decree, he was to maintain a life insurance policy payable to his children; me my sister, and brother. I was told I have to file a Demand"" that the money from the policy be paid to us. It has already been cashed by his trust"





Medical insurance question?

I am 18 and make about $400 a month. i am having some serious health issues and my family has no money or insurance. is there a way i can get cheap insurance or something?





Funeral cost insurance?

I have his permission to discuss this with his insurance company for him, and have done so before. I hate to think of him being ripped off by a company he trusted. It just doesn't seem right that he has paid a huge fee just to save his own money. I don't have life insurance myself, have never believed in it, but my father believes he should have had more than he paid in when it comes to benefits. I don't want to call the insurance company to complain if this sort of pay out is normal."





Who thinks GEICO is a great insurance company?

I think their ads on TV are so right - they have not only the lowest rates (at least for me), but the best customer service too. I have never filed a claim, but recently requested some insurance record from them. Even though I am not their customer anymore (currently do not own a car), they still were very helpful on the phone, sent me the requested letter immediately and even did a follow up on it. I think they are awesome. Who had similar experience with them or any other company? PS - I am not a GEICO employer :))"





How to use cash balance in whole life insurance policy.?

How to use cash balance in whole life insurance policy.?





Has anyone heard of the Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York?

I'm looking for the current name and address of this life insurance company.





Car insurance?

the 3 points are from the 11/10/04... UK question.





Can't find affordable Health Insurance for my wie?

You guys are great, I talked to another person in SS and my wife got signed up for Medicare, I appreciate you input and wish I could choose all you guys for best answer. Being on my Tax return gave her the Medicare so I don't know the other people I talked to maybe because it was Medicare and not SS boy what a run around they gave me. Thanks again."





"Would you buy a 17 year old a dodge challenger if she gets good grades , do what she needs to do around the house, keep up on everything?"

Would you buy a 17 year old a dodge challenger if she gets good grades , do what she needs to do around the house, keep up on everything?"

Cheap car insurance with dui in california?

i know drinking and driving was dumb and dont drink anymore for a year. i need car insurance where can i find the best deal something cheap for a whole year for liabilty for my shitty car.

ANSWER: I would recommend you to visit this internet site where one can get quotes from different companies: INSUREFOREVERYBODY.INFO

Can i get full coverage insurance with a suspended drivers license?

Can i get full coverage insurance with a suspended drivers license?





What is the average coast for general liability insurance for a trucking company?

I'm thinking of starting a new trucking company.





What date should I start my new car insurance?

I am currently looking to change car insurance companies. I am in the UK. My current car insurance ends at Noon on 29th March. Since my insurance ends at Noon, should I start my new insurance with another company on 29th March so that the two overlap (for half a day!) or should I start the new one on 30th March, so I go for half a day without insurance? I assume that most insurance car policies start at midnight and you can't change the start time online, only the start date? What would be best?"





Do I need public liability Insurance ?

We are starting a service that matches companies to website designers. Its an online service. Theoretically there could be issue between the companies meeting through our service. Would we require some sort of public liability insurance to cover us for such issues ? or maybe some other sort of insurance.? regards Ashley





Life insurance quotes make me save money?

Life insurance quotes make me save money?





Who regulates car insurance companies in the UK?

How can I contact them?





Does the best buy insurance cover my ipod touch being lost/stolen?

i lost my ipod touch and i got 3 years of insurance on it and best buy is closed right now since its new year so idk if im covered. i want to know if either i can get a free ipod or get a discount on a new one with my insurance





Best Pet Insurance for Dog?

I am getting a rescue 5 month old dog (will be neutered and have all shots) and will want to buy pet insurance. Any suggestions on good companies for the price?





Help with finding a good honest health insurance provider?

I am a college student looking for affordable insurance with decent coverage. (it's like a needle in a haystack, I know) I don't have any major health problems, so that wouldn't be an issue. I'm already looking into state regulated programs, but I was wondering what privately owned companies might have to offer. What companies have you had a good personal experience with? Or what companies have given you the run-around? What companies should I avoid? P.s. I live in central minnesota if that makes a difference."





"Generally, does renters insurance cover damage caused from moving out?"

As I was moving my couch on my own I accidentally caught a piece of my carpet and did some some major damage. I ripped up about 400 square inches of my former apartments carpet. My old landlord says repair is not an option and replacement of entire apartment carpeting is required, $1800!!! I have renters insurance, but before I consult an agent I was wondering if I was wasting my time. Does this type of damage generally get covered under normal renters insurance?"





Home Insurance advised me not to submit a SMALL claim because if a bigger claim is submitted in the future it will be denied. True?

My side fence fell down from old age. My neighbor and I hired a fence company to install a new fence which cost $2000. We split the cost, so my share is $1000. I submitted this to my insurance company, where my deductible is $500 and the insurance company will re-imburse me the remaining $500. But I all got was my agent advising me not to submit this claim because if there is another bigger claim in the next 5 years, that claim will be denied... Even though I will be paying my yearly premium, submitting a claim can hurt me if I submit another claim within a short time period. WTH am I paying insurance for then?? I have been a customer for over 15 years and my agent advised me of this BS?? Is this what it comes down too? You pay into the system and you can't use it? Are all Insurance companies advising home owners not to submit small claims because future bigger claims will be denied? Should I submit the claim and take my chances in the next 5 years, or just pay the fence in full in case something happens in the next 5 years?"





Can I add my girlfriend to my health insurance if we live together?

Some states allow benefits for partners."" Is this the same? I am insured by Humana (Open Choice PPO)"""





"With the new Health Care Bill, what happens if you don't buy insurance?"

In the new health care bill that just passed through Congress, it says, Every American must buy a health insurance plan"" But what will the consequences be for those of us who can not afford to buy health care at all right now? I"





How much does your car insurance increase when you have two traffic violations in a year?

I was pulled over again for turning right on a no turn on red"". The first time the insurance company said they wouldn't increase the premium. How much would it increase? $200 for the year? more?"""





Are insurance companies really uninformed about climate change?

It is interesting how many say that they're just trying to increase premiums. One might consider that they're competing with each other, and any company that increases premiums that are not matched by competitors will lose business. You'd think that, being conservatives, these folks would realize that basic capitalist principle. Seems that they're not all that good at being conservatives, and are only trying to divert attention from global warming."





What are the recommended coverage i should have for auto insurance?

i don't know anything about auto insurance, so im trying to figured out what i should include in my policy, not just standard, but recommended coverage, so that if anything happen the insurance company can't say this or that doesn't covered...im a person that rather be safe than sorry later... so far i have statefarm in Florida, and here are my coverage and limit so far: liability bodily injury 10/20, property damage 25 per accident. no-fault coverage comprehensive collision uninsured motorist bodily injury 10/20 is there anything else i need to add or missing? is there different between the personal injury protection and no-fault coverage? is my limit enough? my friend has 50/100 limit and pays much lower premium than me (about 40% less)."





Need cheap health insurance for my family....?

Im unemployed and currently receiving unemployment. I need leads or info on cheap or affordable health insurance for my 3 children and I. I live in Dallas, Texas if that helps or makes any difference."





What auto insurance companies provide insurance for adult driver with learners permit?

The car is registered in my name has current tags, plates, etc. I live in California and I am 26. I just got my permit to learn to drive. Since I live in small town and driving school here is only available to high school students and I don't have friend that will let me practice/use their car for driving test I have to use mine. I have a licensed friend who will teach me on my car but won't let me drive theirs because its manual and Ive never driven and they don't want to mess up their transmission."





How do you figh no insurance ticket?

if you get into an accident without insurance, how do you fight it both the police and the insurance."





I'm getting my first car soon do you all recommend the camaro as a first car why or why not?

I'm getting my first car soon do you all recommend the camaro as a first car why or why not?





Auto Insurance average for me?

I've had my temps for about 8mos now, and I'm going Togo to driving school for my license. I'm 17 years old. How much do you think average coverage should be?"





What is the average cost of car insurance?

What is the average insurance cost for a 19 year old male with a early 90s sedan?





Which is the cheapest yet reliable auto insurance company?

Which is the cheapest yet reliable auto insurance company?





Life Insurance general info?

I am looking for information on life insurance, really general stuff, like what the different policy types are and what should determine my decisions. Does anyone know of a general info site so I can arm myself with knowledge before talking to an agent?"





What's the insurance for a lamborghini gallardo?

NO! i'm not looking foward on buying one.. Cant afford it. People told me insurance for this car was $1000 a MONTH.. but i asked a couple people with lamborghinis in gas stations and they said they only pay $2700 a YEAR for their cars... What do you have to say to this? They were in their 30's..

Cheap car insurance with dui in california?

i know drinking and driving was dumb and dont drink anymore for a year. i need car insurance where can i find the best deal something cheap for a whole year for liabilty for my shitty car.

ANSWER: I would recommend you to visit this internet site where one can get quotes from different companies: INSUREFOREVERYBODY.INFO