Keeper Commander SDK Gives Developers More Control Over Password Security

Toolkit Provides API / Command-Line Access for Password Rotation, Automation & More

CHICAGO, IL [November 12, 2015]-- Keeper Security, Inc., creator of Keeper, the world's most downloaded password manager and digital vault, announced today the launch of Keeper Commander, a comprehensive open source toolkit that provides IT administrators and developers with command-line and API-level access to their Keeper Enterprise account.

In addition to command-line and API access, Keeper Commander provides password rotation plugins across common platforms such as Active Directory, Windows, Unix/Linux, Mac, MySQL, PostgreSQL, SQL Server, Oracle and more. Keeper Commander's open source plugin architecture provides developers the ability to integrate password rotation into any target system.

By implementing automatic password rotation into key systems, IT admins and developers can prevent passwords from being leaked and used by rogue employees, contractors or anyone with previous access. When a password is rotated in a target system, Keeper distributes the new password to privileged users through a secure, zero-knowledge architecture with multi-factor authentication and native application access.

“Changes made through Keeper Commander instantly propagate to the Keeper users who have access to that specific credential,” said Darren Guccione, CEO and co-founder of Keeper Security. “When you grant and revoke access or rotate a password it instantly updates to users on their mobile and desktop devices. This control access to highly secure systems by rotating passwords and pushing those credentials to users all happens within the Keeper ecosystem.”

"We wrote the SDK in Python and open-sourced the project on GitHub to make Keeper Commander accessible for IT admins and software developers at all programming skill levels,” said Craig Lurey, CTO and co-founder of Keeper Security. “Developers will appreciate that we’ve wrapped the complex underlying cryptography and provided a simple interface to integrate Keeper into their existing systems. It takes just a few minutes to set up and make use of plugins that have been contributed to the project."

About Keeper Enterprise

Keeper Enterprise is a software platform that provides both password management and secure digital file storage. The platform ensures that employees utilize Keeper to protect the enterprise's most sensitive assets. Keeper Enterprise is a zero-knowledge platform that utilizes the industry's strongest security protocols including 256-bit AES encryption, two-factor authentication and PBKDF2 key generation while also having the industry's strongest certifications -- SOC 2, TRUSTe, Qualys and HIPAA. The newest version of Keeper Enterprise (v2.0) enhances functionality around file sharing, user provisioning, auditing, reporting and delegated administration to serve the needs of Global 2000 organizations. Over 3,000 businesses now use Keeper Enterprise to protect and safeguard their most confidential and sensitive information. To learn more, visit https://keepersecurity.com/enterprise.html.