Beginning of the End of the Beginning. [Sep. 5th, 2003|04:11 pm] Amir

Lets get a couple administrative things out of the way early today.



It took me 14 minutes, I believe the closest guess was in fact 8 hours? Though my math may be off.



This will probably be the second, third, or fourth to last livejournal i'll write because I am going to start writing stuff for my real website, and there is no need to repeat what i say in two locations *as i pack you guys up and move you to beingfamous.com* . More info on that as it develops.



I saw a guy today with a giant eye, i didnt know what to say and i didnt know what to do and i didnt know what sort of "queer eye for the straight guy" joke to make. So i just said "Talk about, Giant Eye for the ... normal... guy.... Hey is that a carrot!?"

But carrot top was walking right next to me and he just shrugged and was like "Whaaat! cant i make a fucking commercial about saving with one eight hundred see aye el el ay cee tee without being hounded like a fucking VEGETABLE!!"

But muhammad Ali was right there and he murmured something to the effect of "Whaaaat! cant i receive 20 years of punishable brain damage without being refferred to as Dave Coulier?"

And uncle joey was walking by and hes like "Who the fuck is dave coulier... fucking faggot."



And im like WOO!!!! UNCLE JOEY IS A HOMOPHOBE!



DOES ANYBODY REMEMBER THAT SONG: Tap the bottle AND twist the cap.



One time my friend judy *aaasiiiaaannnn* said that they wanted her to work january 2nd and she was pissed and i said WHY and she said ITS LIKE 2 DAYS AFTER DECEMBER 25th. So what i want you to do is instant message "ThursdayPhu" and tell her that january 2nd is nt two days after december 25th and that Amir says your asian. Then again she might be reading this now because she tends to do that sorta thing and PREEMPTIVELY get mad at me, but do it anyways. copy and paste the convo into a comment. make a game of it. i dunno okay im just a jew.



I bought a 2000 piece puzzle today, which is a lot. But i looked for the craziest puzzle this place had and it was 18,000 pieces, weighed 9 pounds, cost $199.99*



i had seasoned fries today. i wouldnt say theyre better then regular fries, just different, and better.



Kay schools done for the week and i feel like running a naked MOCK! or is it just amock is one word, or is it a muck. either way, a muck will be mucked and i will be naked for it.



GOOD DAY SIRS.



-amir b.



*price subject to change, check specific store for local details, void where prohibited, if it doesnt say micromachines its not the real thing.