Wackers declare the term offensive say “it is our term to be used by us”

Most every department has a few of them. The guys with more lights on their Chevy or Ford than the front line engine has. People who carry multiple pagers, and radios twenty-four hours a day. The person who dresses head to toe, all day, everyday in 5.11 gear. We all know this person as a “wacker”.

But recently a group of so-called wackers have declared the word “wacker” as offensive. They feel that it is derogatory to be called that term. Virgil Brigman sat down to talk about this issue.

“These guys make fun of us for being enthusiastic. But they are the pathetic ones. When the shit hits the fan they all look to us loser wackers to take control of the scene.”

Virgil then gave us a tour of his ford truck. In addition to having a 200watt siren system Brigman has many lights to make sure people know he is coming.

“See I got a full light bar. I also got a set of LED lights on my dash. Then in my grill I got two mini LED light bars. Also on the side of my license plates I also got some LED lights. Now check this out. The lights in the grill and by the license plates are slightly tilted out. So it makes it easier to see from an angle. Then I also have lights on the back of my truck but they are not as impressive.”

Getting back to the topic of wacker being offensive, Brigman had this to add.

“All the lights, the siren, even my own radio paid for out of my pocket. Guys on my department give me shit about them. But I get to every call. Let that sink in… I make EVERY CALL… Some of the guys I know are lucky to make 40% of the calls. We got guys who don’t have any lights in their cars. They never make calls. They always show up about the time the call is done.”

When CallTheCops pointed out that there are web pages and online forums devoted to the Wacker Lifestyle, Brigman claimed this.

“People who are Wackers, have the right to call each other a Wacker. For us to call each other that, it is not a big deal. But when someone else calls us that, it is derogatory. One Wacker cannot degrade another Wacker. For us to use that word in private it is appropriate, but only for us to use.”

Brigman is lobbying for his department to add a policy about harassment and including Wacker in that policy. Chief Sonny Dawson has thus far declined to take Brigman seriously.