Nathaniel Clyne has given Saints fresh hope that he could yet sign a new contract with them, by revealing he is happy to stay at the club.

The right-back is approaching the final 12 months of his current deal, with a number of high-profile sides, including Manchester United, said to be seriously interested in him.

Negotiations between Saints and Clyne’s agent began some months ago, but the lack of an agreement to date has fuelled fears that the 24-year-old will end up being sold this summer.

Clyne, however, has at least indicated that he would be happy to remain a Saints player beyond this season.

He told the Daily Echo: “I’m enjoying my football for Southampton, playing week-in, week-out and it’s an up-and-coming club, so, yeah, I’m happy playing for Southampton and happy to stay at Southampton as well.”

Clyne’s comments add weight to those from Saints’ executive director of football, Les Reed, who last week said “the signs are good” that the player would stay with the club.

Saints are clearly keen for a swift resolution, though, with manager Ronald Koeman saying last Thursday that the England international needed to let them know within ten days what he plans to do, adding that the club has made him the maximum offer they can.

Asked about that deadline, Clyne, who has made 101 appearances for Saints since signing from Crystal Palace in 2012, said the matter remained in the hands of his representative.

“My agent is negotiating, so I’ll just leave it with my agent and I’m just going to concentrate on playing my football,” he explained.

While Clyne’s words may provide encouragement, there remains plenty of concern that this will be his last season at St Mary’s.

It remains to be seen what bids, if any, will come in for him this summer, but if a club like United is willing to sign him as their first-choice right-back, with the prospect of regular Champions League football and the additional wages that such a move could entail, it would clearly be a hard one for the player to resist.

Additionally, it is unlikely that Saints would be happy to let Clyne’s value diminish if it becomes clear a new contract will not be agreed, especially as he would still command a large fee even with just a year left on his current deal.

But the defender’s acknowledgment that he would be happy to stay at St Mary’s beyond this summer at least provides some optimism as the end of the season, not to mention negotiations, approaches.