Transform more of your landscape and get a coupon from SAWS to help you pay for every 200 square feet of grass you remove!

The wait is over — it's time to put your fall landscaping plans in motion. The 2019 spring edition of WaterSaver Coupons have returned and are waiting for you!

Imagine transforming your landscape and getting a coupon from SAWS to help you pay for every 200 square feet of grass you remove! All while saving water and money.

SAWS residential customers can apply for up to four WaterSaver coupons to replace part of your thirsty lawn with lush, drought-tolerant garden beds and/or permeable patios. Combine the Landscape and Patioscape coupons any way you like.

Apply by May 31 and redeem your coupons by July 31, 2019.

Here's How it Works

Take a single photo of your project site where you plan to remove grass and install your new landscape bed and/or patioscape. For each coupon, you must remove at least 200 square feet of lawn grass, the single most water-demanding element in a residential landscape.

WaterSaver Landscape Coupon — $100 Pick 15 drought-tolerant plants from more than 100 gorgeous plants in any combination to create a 200 square feet garden bed you'll admire for years.

Pick 15 drought-tolerant plants from more than 100 gorgeous plants in any combination to create a 200 square feet garden bed you'll admire for years. WaterSaver Patioscape Coupon — $100 ($200 if you have an irrigation system) Purchase enough flagstone, pavers or stepping stones (your choice) to create a contiguous 200 square foot patioscape, perfect for an outdoor living space.

Each coupon is intended to cover only a portion of the cost. You may apply for four coupons in each season (spring and fall) in any combination of Landscape and Patioscape coupons, but there is a lifetime limit of eight coupons per service account. That’s up to 1,600 square feet of outdoor space that can be transformed from bland to beautiful.

Eligible customers will receive an email with their eCoupon(s) within one week. It will be sent to the email address provided in the application. Customers who apply for multiple coupons will receive them in separate emails. Redeem your eCoupons from your mobile device at participating stores. A cashier will enter the store code on your mobile device to validate the coupon. A printed version or screenshot of the coupon will not work.

Planning and design are key to making smart water-saving landscape changes. Be sure to identify and measure the areas to change and visualize the beautiful lush flower beds and inviting outdoor living spaces you can create with the WaterSaver coupons.

Have an irrigation system?

If you have an automatic irrigation system, schedule a free irrigation consultation now. To take advantage of the WaterSaver coupons, you’ll need to cap all the irrigation heads in the area where you will install beds or patios. If the required changes to your system are extensive, you may also qualify for our residential irrigation design rebate, which may further defray the cost of your project.

Homeowners that have an irrigation system must schedule a free SAWS irrigation consult to qualify for a coupon. To schedule your consult, call 704-SAVE (7283) or email consult@saws.org.

Photo Inspection and Special Mulch Coupon

You can get a $50 special mulch coupon this spring after you redeem your WaterSaver coupon(s) and complete your project.

Apply for your WaterSaver Landscape or Patioscape coupons by May 31. Redeem the coupon(s). After redeeming a WaterSaver Coupon, you''ll receive an email with a link to submit an inspection form and up to three (3) photos of your completed project. Apply by July 31, 2019. You’ll receive an email with a link to the mulch application. Attach photos of your completed project to the form. After approval, we’ll send your mulch coupon via email. Redeem it with your mobile device at participating mulch vendors (same as Rewards Mulch Retailers).

Completed project photos and inspection form must be submitted by July 31, 2019.

Special mulch coupon expires Aug. 15, 2019.