UPDATE: LAKE ELSINORE: Doughnut store gets “B” health grade after Ariana Grande licking incident

Days after pop star Ariana Grande was caught on camera licking doughnuts on a counter at Wolfee Donuts in Lake Elsinore, the shop’s owner filed an incident report Tuesday, July 7, with the Riverside County Sheriff’s Department.

Owner Joe Marin, who realized Grande’s stunt after reviewing surveillance footage from Saturday night, July 4, said he hopes the report will result in criminal charges brought against Grande.

“What she did was wrong,” Marin said in a phone interview Wednesday.

On Tuesday, Marin went to the Lake Elsinore sheriff’s station with the surveillance footage. Deputies told him they would review the video, Marin said.

The Sheriff’s Department, in a written statement issued Wednesday, said deputies are working with the Riverside County Department of Environmental Health to investigate the incident.

The Department of Environmental Health isn’t investigating Grande’s activity, said spokeswoman Dottie Merki. It is investigating a possible California Retail Food Code violation by Wolfee Donuts.

Merki said the food that Grande licked appeared to have been left out.

“According to California Retail Food Code, all food must be protected from any type of customer contamination,” Merki said. “Any time food items are displayed without protection, customers can sneeze on, cough on or lick them.”

In the footage, trays of doughnuts are seen on top of a display case. However, Marin said doughnuts are never displayed there. Rather, an employee had put the trays on top of the case while she was stocking it. When Grande walked in, Marin said, the employee stopped what she was doing to tend to the customers.

If investigators determine Wolfee Donuts to be in violation of food code, the restaurant could have points deducted from its inspection score.

Wolfee Donuts’ most recent score was 90, the minimum score for an A grade — the only grade that is considered passing. Points were deducted for violations including food not being separated and protected from contamination, inadequate hand-washing facilities and having food obtained from unapproved sources.

In 11 routine inspections over the past six years, Wolfee Donuts has scored in a range between 90 and 100 points.

Any score below 90 indicates a facility does not comply with minimum sanitary standards, and it is required to get its grade back up into the A range quickly, according to the environmental health department’s website.

Grande was in the doughnut shop, which is open 24 hours, about 11:30 p.m. Saturday. The surveillance footage, which Marin shared exclusively with celebrity paparazzi website TMZ, shows Grande and a male companion giggling and talking in close proximity. Then, when the employee’s back was turned, Grande appears to lick a white doughnut and the young man follows suit, Marin said.

TMZ identified the man as her boyfriend and backup dancer, Ricky Alvarez.

Grande asked to see more doughnuts, and when the employee walked to the back of the store to fetch another tray, the singer and her companion also spat on a doughnut, Marin said.

When the employee returned with the tray, the camera recorded Grande saying, “What … is that? I hate Americans. I hate America.”

In a statement to The Associated Press on Wednesday, the 22-year-old singer — who was born in Florida and is of Italian descent — says she’s a proud American.

She added that “what I said in a private moment … was taken out of context and I am sorry for not using more discretion with my choice of words.”

Grande said she chose those words because she’s a healthy person and is upset with “how freely we as Americans eat and consume things without giving any thought to the consequences.”

The Associated Press contributed to this report.