The official Twitter account for the Mr. Osomatsu anime announced on Tuesday that the series will run for two consecutive seasons. The second half will begin in January.

The series premiered on October 5. Crunchyroll is streaming the series as it airs in Japan.

In a press conference on October 29, Yūichi Takahashi of TV Tokyo apologized for the series' third episode. The episode contained a parody of the Anpanman children's anime character. The first and second episodes of the show also contained parodies of many other series, such as Attack on Titan , Boys Over Flowers , and Sailor Moon . The first episode is scheduled to be removed from various streaming sites on November 12, and will be reanimated for the home video release.

Japan does not have a parody exception or provision in its copyright law. Therefore, making parodies of copyrighted works may illegally violate a copyright owners' "right to maintain integrity," if performed without the copyright holder's prior consent.

Fujio Akatsuka's original Osomatsu-kun manga and "high tension comedy" TV anime centered on the Matsuno household, which has six naughty and mischievous sons (who are sextuplets). All of the sextuplets, including the eldest Osomatsu, are all in love with the same girl, Totoko. The original series followed the family when the sons were 10 years old.

The first 56-episode series aired in Japan in 1966-1967. Akira Shigino (Time Bokan: Royal Revival, Marude Dameo, Crayon Shin-chan: Otakebe! Kasukabe Yasei Ōkoku) directed the series, and Mainichi Broadcasting, Studio Zero, and Children's Corner produced the series. Studio Pierrot animated the second 86-episode series, which aired from 1988-1989. Shigino served as chief director.

The staff are creating the new anime to commemorate what would have been Akatsuka's 80th birthday (Akatsuka passed away in 2008 at age 72).

Akatsuka launched the Osomatsu-kun manga in Shogakukan's Weekly Shonen Sunday magazine in 1962, and the manga ran in the magazine until 1969. The manga then ran in Weekly Shonen King from 1972-1973, and then in Comic BonBon from 1987-1990. The compiled manga volumes have more than 10 million copies in print.

[Via Hachima Kikō]