Update:

A league source tells Brian Costello of the New York Post that the Jets are “not being very aggressive” when it comes to possibly re-signing free agent CB Antonio Cromartie.

“Don’t count on them getting Cromartie,” Costello’s source said.

After missing out on Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie, many have assumed that the Jets would turn their attention to possibly bringing back Antonio Cromartie next year, but it appears as though the team has no plans to rush into things.

Cromartie, soon to be 30, is coming off of a very poor season by normal standards. He appeared in 16 games for the Jets and totaled 38 tackles, three interceptions and a forced fumble.

Pro Football Focus had him rated as the No. 100 cornerback out of 103 qualifying players last year.

We have him listed as the No. 5 best available player in our Top 50 Free Agents list.

—————–

Kent Somers reports that the Cardinals continue to discuss a contract with free agent CB Antonio Cromartie, who’s visit with the team will now carry over into Friday.

Somers adds that he’s isn’t sure if a deal ultimately gets done, but the two sides were negotiating.

Manish Mehta first reported that Cromartie was visiting with the Cardinals on Thursday.

Cormartie hasn’t found a lot of interest since the Jets cut him loose, but that could have something to do with the depth of this year’s cornerback class.

Cromartie, soon to be 30, is coming off of a very poor season by normal standards. He appeared in 16 games for the Jets and totaled 38 tackles, three interceptions and forced fumble.

Pro Football Focus had him rated as the No. 100 cornerback out of 103 qualifying players last year.

———-

Chris Russell of ESPN Radio 980 reports that a league source has informed him that the veteran CB Antonio Cromartie would be “open” to playing for the Redskins.

However, Russell adds that Washington has yet to reach out to Cromartie.

Many expected the Redskins to major players for defensive backs, but that hasn’t proved to be the case. They have been linked to free agents like S Ryan Clark, CB Carlos Rogers and CB Captain Munnerlyn, so they could other guys to watch in case nothing develop with Cromartie.

—————

Manish Mehta of the New York Daily News previously reported that the Jets could still bring Cromartie back at some point, but it’s likely to be at lower price.