The Commonwealth Bank Bushrangers have dropped a bombshell on the eve of their crucial Matador BBQs One-Day Cup clash against Tasmania with Glenn Maxwell handed a one-match team suspension.

Victoria need to defeat the Tigers at North Sydney Oval tomorrow to guarantee their place in Friday’s elimination final at Drummoyne Oval, but coach David Saker has come down hard on the superstar allrounder after he missed a team recovery session early on Monday.

Quick Single: Hastings backs Vic batsmen to fire

It’s a huge blow for the Bushrangers as they look to cement a finals berth, and comes just a day after an impressive victory over the previously undefeated NSW Blues.

“We’re disappointed that Glenn let down his teammates and missed a recovery session this morning,” Saker said.

“We have high expectations of all our players and as a senior player, Glenn should be taking a leadership role.

“As a result he will not be playing in tomorrow’s match against Tasmania.”

In a statement released tonight, Maxwell said he was disappointed to miss tomorrow’s match after thinking he had a free morning before joining the members of the national team for a day of media commitments.

“I understand that I broke team rules by missing recovery and I have accepted the consequences,” Maxwell said.

“It was an oversight on my behalf where I thought I had a free morning before some Australia team commitments.

“I'm extremely disappointed to be missing a game, but I will continue to do everything possible to help the Bushrangers win the Matador Cup.”

WATCH: Maxwell makes important fifty

During the domestic competition, Maxwell has shown glimpses of the form that saw him named in the official Team of the World Cup earlier this year, but also received his share of criticism as he looks to push for a Test recall after the missing out on an opportunity in the postponed Qantas Tour of Bangladesh.

Australia’s Bupa Support Team Head Coach Darren Lehmann criticised Maxwell’s dismissal in Victoria’s loss to Queensland at Blacktown International Sportspark in the opening week of the tournament.

"He's exciting, but we have to see him be really hungry to make big runs," Lehmann told 6PR radio.

"Take the example of his (Matador Cup) performance on Friday. He was out caught at deep third man, where the wicket was low and slow.

Quick Single: Hastings sparks Bushrangers upset

"He really could have played a technical innings, which we know he can do.

"He's been brilliant for us over the last 12 months in the one-day format.

"But again, it's a case of him taking his game to the next level in the longer format."

Maxwell responded with a man-of-the-match performance against Western Australia, but was then brought undone for five against the Blues and didn’t feature with the ball on the small venue at North Sydney.

Allrounder Marcus Stoinis looks set to replace Maxwell in the Bushrangers XI for tomorrow’s crunch match after he made way for experienced opener Rob Quiney yesterday.

Cricket Victoria confirmed that Maxwell would be available for selection in Friday’s elimination final, should they qualify.