Love ribs? Crazy for chicken wings? Wild for Chateaubriand? Then walk this way because we’ve rounded-up the most mouth-watering feeds in Leeds for carnivores…

If you’re unrepentantly obsessed with meat in all its forms this is just what you’re waiting for. It’s the ultimate to do list for the city’s carnivores, with 15 utterly mouth-watering, undeniably awesome meat-centric feasts. From giant piles of ribs to huge burritos and unlimited steak, we’ve rounded up the city’s meatiest eats, all in one place.

Red’s True BBQ’s Pitmaster Tray

Red’s is a Leeds institution. It’s classic American BBQ, with meats cooked low and slow until they fall off the bone. They do everything from ribs to brisket, but why limit yourself to just one? Get the The Pitmaster Tray and try it all. This meat-obsessed dish brings together St. Louis ribs, Black Angus brisket, Red’s pulled pork and smoked cheese and jalapeño sausage, all on one succulent tray of barbecued brilliance.

Red’s True BBQ, 1 Cloth Hall Street, Leeds, West Yorkshire, LS1 2HD & 6a Otley Road, Leeds, West Yorkshire, LS6 2AA.

Man v Roast’s daily carvery

Can’t wait ’til Sunday for a roast? Man v Roast is the place to go. It’s a haven for meat lovers – you can indulge in a roast dinner every day of the week, with a loaded tray of turkey, beef, lamb, gammon, pork, chicken or sausage (you can even mix and match). Their meat is sourced from Sykes House Farm, so you know it’s the good stuff, and it’s finished off with all the trimmings, including roasties, a Yorkshire pudding and oodles of gravy.

Man v Roast, 144 Cardigan Road, Leeds, West Yorkshire, LS6 1LL.

Almost Famous’ This is Leeds burger

Almost Famous has a burger that’s dedicated to Leeds. It’s so packed full of meaty goodness that it spills out of the sides. They start with a double cheeseburger to start, before piling on the bacon and BBQ pulled pork. It’s finished off with mac ’n’ cheese, shoestring onions, redneck BBQ sauce, peppered mayo, Henderson’s Relish and Wensleydale cheese. Reckon you can stomach it?

Almost Famous, 23-25 Great George Street, Leeds, West Yorkshire, LS1 3AL.

The Lost & Found’s Chateaubriand

Who doesn’t love Chateaubriand? This little beauty is cut from the fillet head, which means it’s insanely tender and blessed with a wonderfully subtle flavour. At The Lost & Found, they cook it over charcoal on their Josper grill, adding just a hint of smokiness, then serve it with your choice of sauces – Béarnaise, peppercorn or garlic butter. But that’s not even the best bit because you can get it for just £65 with two sides and a very nice bottle of wine – get the deal and get it quick!

The Lost & Found Leeds Club, 3 Albion Place, Leeds, West Yorkshire, LS1 6JL.

Smak’s traditional Polish sausages

There’s a secret behind the incredible sausages at Smak! These traditional Polish bangers are made using a family recipe that’s been passed down through generations, and the result is absolutely delicious. You can get a few different options, from lamb and chicken to pork and beef with a kick of chilli. They’re all smoked and cured on a Yorkshire farm 20 miles outside Leeds before being sizzled on the BBQ in town.

Smak! can be found at various street food events across the city and they’re opening a permanent venue on Kirkstall Road in 2018.

FireLake’s Yorkshire pudding sandwich

You read that right – one of the cornerstones of FireLake’s menu is the Yorkshire pudding sandwich and it’s a big hit with the carnivores. They’ve done away with bread, and swapped it for two massive Yorkshire puddings, which they stuff with freshly-roasted Ripon reared beef. It’s drizzled with 72-hour beef gravy made with bone marrow and confit onions – expect a meaty mess that tastes amazing.

FireLake Grill House & Cocktail Bar, Radisson Blu, The Light, 13 The Headrow, Leeds, West Yorkshire, LS1 8TL.

Fazenda’s endless barbecue

If there’s one thing carnivores love, it’s an endless supply of meat, so why not visit Leeds’ original Brazilian barbecue? Fazenda is the standard-bearer when it comes to all-you-can-eat dining and they’ve created a meaty heaven. Flip your card to green and they’ll bring you everything from filé mignon to picanha rump, pork sausage and gammon with pineapple. If you’re feeling daring, try their traditional chicken hearts.

Fazenda, Waterman’s Place, Unit 4-7 Granary Wharf, Leeds, West Yorkshire, LS1 4GL.

East 59th’s unlimited hot ’n’ spicy chicken wings

If you’re feeling hungry, make a beeline for East 59th on a Tuesday, because that’s when you can indulge in their unlimited crispy chicken wings. These irresistible morsels come covered in a hot ’n’ spicy glaze with a blue cheese sauce for you to dip – you can have as many as you like for 90 minutes from when you order. Heck, they’ll even give you a house beer or glass of wine to wash them down with, all for just £15.

East 59th, Victoria Gate, Eastgate, Leeds, West Yorkshire, LS2 7AU.

Poco’s rotisserie chicken

Poco takes roast chicken to the next level. Pollo arrosto, that’s rotisserie chicken to you and me, is their speciality – they marinate their birds in a super secret Sicilian marinade 24 hours before they go into the rotisserie oven to slow cook. The result is a wonderfully tender chicken that you can order as a quarter, a half or, if you’re going all out, a full bird – with a side of patate rustiche, it’s a meal fit for a king.

Poco, 360 Kirkstall Road, Leeds, West Yorkshire, LS4 2HQ.

The Mexican Pilgrim’s heaving burrito

Trust us when we say there’s not another burrito quite like The Mexican Pilgrim’s – they are absolutely ginormous. You could get it filled with pork carnitas in a red wine & chipotle BBQ sauce or try their marinated minced beef, but whatever you go for, their spectacular combination of meat, refried beans, lettuce, guacamole, sour cream and pico de gallo will threaten to spill out of the sides. Top tip – make sure you’ve got napkins.

The Mexican Pilgrim, East Parade Triangle, Leeds, West Yorkshire, LS1 5PS.

Smokin’s 12-hour marinated beef rib

The clue’s in the name – it’s that big ‘ole smoker that makes Smokin’ Bar and Kitchen’s beef rib a must try. They rub it in their secret spice mix and then smoke it low and slow over a wood-fuelled grill for 12 hours overnight and smother it in BBQ sauce. The result is a juicy, tender cut of meat that falls apart on the plate.

Smokin’ Bar and Kitchen, 24 Park Row, Leeds, West Yorkshire, LS1 5QB.

Fat Annie’s Philly cheesesteak

Fat Annie’s aren’t just about hot dogs – you need to try their Philly cheesesteak. They take a fresh ciabatta roll and stuff it full of freshly cooked rump steak which is slathered in gooey American cheese and finished off with a smattering of tasty green peppers and onions. It’s a meaty staple of the US that Fat Annie’s have got down to a fine art – try it out.

Fat Annie’s, Leeds Kirkgate Market, Kirkgate, Leeds, West Yorkshire, LS2 7HY.

Growlers’ authentic Yorkshire pies

Yorkshire is known for its love of pies, but if you haven’t been to Growlers’ yet, you’re missing out. This Pudsey mainstay has mastered the art of the pie – you can get everything from steak and kidney to meat and potato here, as well as Cornish pasties and sausage rolls. But it’s their traditional Yorkshire pork pies that steal the show – they’re so good they named their shop after them.

Growlers, 159 Richardshaw Lane, Pudsey, Leeds, West Yorkshire, LS28 6AA.

Stampede’s all you can eat ribs & wings

This one is the ultimate meat feast. Every Monday, park your bum in their restaurant at the corner of St John’s Centre and wear some stretchy pants, because for £21.95 you can tuck into as many BBQ ribs and wings as you can stomach. That’s right – they’ll keep bringing them out for as long as you can clear your plate, with chips to keep the meat sweats at bay.

Stampede, St Johns Centre, Albion Street, Leeds, West Yorkshire, LS2 8LQ.

Tattu’s BBQ sampler

If you’re looking for a scrumptious meat feast, try a Chinese one for a change. Tattu’s BBQ sampler features 4 different cuts of meat. You can try their wonderfully smoky honey and soy roasted duck breast, alongside belly pork, cooked in a soy and coriander marinade, and the char-siu pork, made with hoisin and Shaoxing wine. The star of the show is the beef short-rib – it’s cooked for 12 hours before being glazed with their beef jus and soy reduction, before it’s finished on the barbecue.

Tattu, Minerva House, 29 East Parade, Leeds, West Yorkshire, LS1 5PS.

Cover image © Copyright Leeds-List 2018 by Ali Turner