Update: 11:15 am

Allen Wayne Densen Morgan, a 29-year-old veteran from Munford, Ala. entered a guilty plea in federal court Thursday for attempting to hire what he thought were Ku Klux Klansmen to murder his neighbor. According to court documents, Morgan told an undercover FBI agent he wanted to see his neighbor “hung from a tree like he is an animal” and “his dick cut off” over accusations that the man, a convicted sex offender, had raped his wife.

An affidavit given by FBI Special Agent Cornelius Harris Jr. in support of a criminal complaint filed Aug. 26 explains that Morgan believed his neighbor, Clifford Maurice Mosley, raped his wife earlier that month. Records show that Mosley, who is African American, was arrested in 2008 for sexual abuse, a fact Morgan was aware of. Harris wrote that Morgan told an undercover FBI agent he responded to the alleged rape by attempting to “force a confrontation” with Mosley on Aug. 22 by firing “multiple rounds of ammunition” at Mosley on the street outside their homes.

“Mosley fled on foot as Morgan fired several shots in the ground beside him in an effort to intimidate him,” explained Harris. “Morgan assessed that Mosley must be guilty of the rape of his wife because Mosley never tried to defend himself by standing his ground or offering to reason with Morgan.”

Shortly after this incident, Harris said an undercover FBI agent who identified himself as a Klansman called Morgan in order to “verify his desire to murder” Mosley. According to the complaint, during that conversation, Morgan described the shooting incident and said he would meet with the agent on Aug. 25 to arrange payment. The undercover agent claimed he was “en route to Tennessee to pick up a partner to take care of this matter for Morgan.”

“Morgan advised that he and his family are supportive of the plan to murder Clifford Maurice Mosley,” Harris wrote, adding that Morgan said his father-in-law and mother-in-law wanted “to dynamite the entire block.”

Harris also quoted Morgan as having provided detailed instructions about how exactly he wanted Mosley to be killed by the Klan.

“I want this man hung from a tree like he is an animal. I want his dick cut off and I want him cut,” Morgan said, according to the complaint. “You’re a hunting man right? … I want him hung from a tree and gutted and left him hung in that tree. … That’s how I want him to die. Die a slow and painful death.”

As promised, Morgan met with the agent posing as a Klansman on Aug. 25 at a local motel. Harris said he told the two undercover agents “he would pay them money to commit the murder,” but also informed them “he had no money.”

“He then offered as payment … a watch and a necklace from his person,” wrote Harris. “Additionally, Morgan offered to tender as additional payment, a firearm located at his residence as payment.”

The criminal complaint said that at “the conclusion of the meeting” in the motel, Morgan was arrested and confessed that he “intended” to hire hitmen to kill Mosley. According to a statement from the Department of Justice Morgan was subsequently charged with “one count of using and causing someone else to use interstate facilities and travel — a telephone and a motor vehicle — with the intent to commit a murder-for hire” in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Alabama.

Based on a Facebook page that appears to belong to Morgan, he may have attempted to sell a Playstation and some video games to raise money in the days before his meeting with the supposed hitman. The Facebook page matches Morgan’s name and identifies him as an Iraq War veteran who lives in Munford. In a pair of updates posted on Aug. 22, the same day Morgan allegedly first spoke with the agent posing as the Klan contract killer, the Facebook used identified as Allen Morgan discussed his efforts to sell the video games.

“PlayStation 3 plus Â³ games for sale super cheap, inbox me series [sic] inquiries only,” Morgan wrote. “Lowest j can go and I’m losing money, PS3 plus 3 games for $160.”

On Facebook, Morgan listed one item under “interests:” “United Klans of America Inc.”

Following his guilty plea Morgan is due to be sentenced on February 27, 2014. Read the full criminal complaint below.

Criminal Complaint: United States of America v. Allen Wayne Densen Morgan

Photo: Facebook