If you were injured in a car accident and need a car accident attorney in Dallas click here for more information

Your browser does not support the video tag.

Optimum HealthCare - One Call Does it ALL!



We believe that being healthy means more than being pain free—it is the ability to do what you need and want to in regaining quality of life through receiving treatment for your condition by health professionals of your choosing. Health professionals in our Dallas network provide Chiropractic Care, Physical Therapy, Massage Therapy, and Car Accidents injury care in Dallas, to help Back Pain and other joint pain injuries.



Our Blog Optimum Health Care Blog - Helpful Car Accident Tips:

There’s no planning for the unexpected. And when the unexpected is an unfortunate car ac... Keeping Your Family and Finances Safe After a Car Accident:

The Busy Streets of Dallas Are Filled with Car Accidents, Take Measures to Keep your Family and Fina... Optimum Health Care Blog - How to Deal With Jealousy:

How can you deal with jealousy? Jealousy is the worst. It makes you feel awful about ... Optimum Healthcare Blog - Dallas Work Ethic:

Has Dallas lost touch with it's work ethic? There was a time where the work force of A...

What People Are Saying About Us

I had never been in a auto accident before.



So when I was in a car accident in Dallas, things got really ugly for me. I had been rear ended and my back and neck were hurting me after the accident. So much so that I started to worry. I had consulted the MD after and all he prescribed me were pain meds. First of all, I am only into naturopathic medicine and the idea of taking any sort of drug made me worried out of my mind. But I took them to kill the pain. After taking the meds for few weeks, the pain was still there. I didn't know what to do about covering my bills from the doctor or how the insurance even worked. So I did some research and found OHC, with one call they helped me with treatment for my back and handled all my insurance information, and even set up a lawyer to handle my case. They didn't charge me anything for whatever they did for me. They told me what they were handling and what to do when you are in a car accident. With treatment my back and neck pain lessened. They helped me out through this difficult time.



- John Sezar

I needed help with my chronic BACK PAIN



After an accident a few years ago I hurt my back. I started having weird sharp pains in my body. I would be sitting at work and I would have sharp stabbing pains in my side or arm. It was very painful. I had it after a night of sharp pains that lasted over four hours. It was so painful I couldn't sleep, eat, I couldn't do anything, I was immobile. I found Optimum Health Care online and I set up an appointment. I started rehabilitation, the chiropractor said that my nerves were being pinched and needed to be realigned. I didn't care about what I had to do, I just wanted it gone! I started treatment/therapy and was told do exercises, realignment, stress reduction, and I would start to feel better. I did everything I was told. Within 3 weeks I had less and less sharp pains.. I could sit at work on the computer and not feel the horrible pains anymore- I WAS BETTER! I was ecstatic. I go to the Optimum Health Care Dallas clinic twice a week to this day and have never felt better!



- Tess Guzman





