Tesla’s Model X is fast, like, really fast. It might not look it, but the all-electric “family” car that can seat up to seven adults is actually the fastest SUV out there, according to Tesla. It can accelerate from zero to 60 miles per hour in under three seconds, for those who are counting.

Just to prove how fast the car really can go, Jason Cammisa, car expert and journalist, raced the Model X against an Alfa Romeo 4C. But there was a catch, to make it a fair race, there was another car involved, another Alfa 4C on a tow, attached to the back of the Model X. The videos of the race popped up on none other than Tesla Founder and CEO, Elon Musk’s Twitter and Instagram accounts.

The Alfa Romeo 4C, can go zero to 60 mph in 4.2 seconds. But even with what Cammisa says is a 4,000 pound trailer on the back, the Model X was still the winner on a straight track. The video shows the two cars racing along, almost neck and neck, but the Model X accelerates past the Alfa to the finish line. Cammisa clarifies that the race was not scientific and there was no equipment involved, but he says, “The point here is that the Alfa 4C is a really, really, fast car and the Model X is so much faster that you have to put a 4,000 lb trailer on it to make it as fast as a really, really, fast car.”

Musk’s captions on the videos didn’t offer much information on the race, or where the videos came from. He simply wrote, “Model X races a gasoline sports car while towing a sports car.” The Model X isn’t even the fastest car of all of Tesla’s vehicles, the newly unveiled Roadster that was released along with the Tesla Semi earlier this month. The Roadster can accelerate from zero to 60 mph in under two seconds, a whole second quicker than the Model X.

If the speed of the Model X makes you want one, you’ll have to get in line. It’ll cost you nearly $80,000 and you’ll have to wait until 2018 if you want to buy the vehicle new and outright. Tesla’s faced criticism in the last few months for its delays on the Model 3 production line as well as a quarterly loss and alleged racism at its factories.