If anything is reliable these days, it’s people’s ability to become outraged and offended over seemingly well-meaning gestures. Case in point, the United Nations dropping Wonder Woman as it’s honorary ambassador amid claims that she is too hot.

The Amazon was chosen because, the U.N. said, it addresses the issues “about women and girls everywhere, who are wonder women in their own right, and the men and boys who support their struggle for gender equality.” Seems pretty straight-forward.. Apparently, though, some people took offense to this particular selection, starting a petition claiming that “a large-breasted white woman of impossible proportions, scantily clad in a shimmery, thigh-baring body suit with an American flag motif and knee-high boots” was not someone people around the world should be looking up to.

First of all, what is wrong with a large-breasted woman with knee-high boots? As someone who has both, they are 1. fun, and 2. awesome. And a thigh-baring suit? Sorry, let me just take out my ruler and make sure I’m abiding by the modesty policy.

Anyone who’s gone to the movies or watched a cartoon in the last fifteen years knows that female leads in the superhero universe are uncommon–and ones that aren’t completely damaged, evil, or a living embodiment of Curate’s Egg are even rarer. That’s been changing lately, but what we’ve been seeing so far isn’t much.

Wonder Woman is one of the few strong female superheroes who isn’t always finding herself in an abusive relationship, or who lets herself get kicked around by other men in her universe.

She kicks ass, is concerned about the environment, and encourages women everywhere to be better and stronger before they are told they can be otherwise. She’s even pro-trans (If you’ll notice, by the way, her costume in Justice League: War is more conservative than usual, and they even point out her controversial looks in the clip provided). Wonder Woman is aware of her sexiness, and she owns it. She stands up to Superman, and, frankly, she’s kind of a bitch…

Sure she’s got big tits. Sure she’s white. That doesn’t mean she can’t be a role model. The people condemning her for her appearance are no less shallow or superficial than the fans they’re trying to shame.

If you want to decry the U.N.’s choice for an arguably trivial position being filled by a fictional character, do so because of what Wonder Woman stands for: maybe she’s too violent, maybe she is so pro-feminism that she can sometimes put the pussy on a pedestal. Don’t chain her to your oppressive, narrow-minded standards because she fails to check every box on your progressivity requirements.