Daniell Staskos sentenced to mandatory 6 months in jail over police officer assault

Updated

A Perth woman has been sentenced to six months in jail for assaulting a police officer, with the magistrate noting he had no option as the charge carries a mandatory minimum term.

Daniell Brook Staskos was found guilty of assaulting the female officer by biting her on the thigh and hitting her in the face in Fremantle in January 2013.

The policewoman was one of three officers who detained Staskos after she became involved in an argument with her former boyfriend.

The offence of assaulting a police officer causing bodily harm carries a mandatory six-month jail term in Western Australia.

However, before sentencing, Staskos lodged an appeal against her conviction and the verdict was overturned by a Supreme Court judge, who ruled the arrest had been unlawful because Staskos had not been told on what grounds she was being detained.

But prosecutors successfully challenged that ruling in the Court of Appeal and the conviction was reinstated.

In a final bid, Staskos lodged an appeal in the High Court but the court refused to hear the case.

Magistrate Steven Malley said he had read a number of character referrals and was satisfied that Staskos' actions on the night of the assault were out of character but his hands were tied when it came to sentencing.

"I'm guided by Parliament as to this sentence," Mr Malley said.

"Normally imprisonment would not be my only option. But it doesn't matter if the Queen sends you a referral, I'm bound by the legislation."

An emotional Staskos was flanked by several family and friends as she arrived at Fremantle Court for sentencing.

Some screamed and sobbed as Mr Malley handed down his sentencing.

One called out "be strong" as Staskos was taken into custody.

Supporters heckle Staskos' victim

Police Union president George Tilbury was joined in court today by Kelly Robinson, the officer assaulted by Staskos.

Both were heckled by supporters of Ms Staskos outside court, prompting a call for police assistance, however the crowd dispersed shortly before extra officers arrived.

Mr Tilbury said the sentencing sent a strong message to the community and came as a relief to Senior Constable Robinson.

"Biting anyone is a disgusting act but to do it to a police officer is unforgivable," he said.

"This case has been in every criminal court in the land, but we finally have the correct outcome.

"It's good to see the offender has now gone to prison, which is what should occur when anyone bites and punches a police officer and causes them bodily harm.

"We've seen today by the comments made by the magistrate that the judiciary are reluctant to sentence people who assault police officers to imprisonment.

"This is exactly why Parliament had to intervene, and we pushed for many years to have mandatory sentencing introduced."

Mr Tilbury said the incident had taken a toll on Senior Constable Robinson and her family.

"She's glad it has come to a conclusion," he said.

Topics: law-crime-and-justice, assault, perth-6000

First posted