Orlando City has become accustomed to visiting teams' approach in the Citrus Bowl this season.

Through the first four home games, New York City FC, the Vancouver Whitecaps, D.C. United and Toronto FC have all come to Orlando and employed a defensive formation built around counter-attacking.

With Orlando City's philosophy of possession and building through short passes and overloads, the visitors' defensive approach has provided a level of protection against a talented Lions roster that nonetheless has yet to prove it can consistently break teams down.

The results have been stellar for the away teams.

Orlando City (2-4-2, 8 pts.) has lost three straight games at home and has just one goal at the Citrus Bowl — Kaká's equalizer in a season-opening tie against fellow-expansion side NYCFC.

Despite that track record, however, the New England Revolution is unlikely to employ a similar formula on Friday night. New England's strength comes in its front three attacking players: forwards Teal Bunbury, Juan Agudelo and Charlie Davies.

The Revolution (5-2-2, 17 pts.) is not a team built to sit back and let the other team dictate the tempo.

"They're always wanting to get those three guys in behind [the defense,]" Orlando City assistant Mark Watson said. "It's about being aware, having good shape, having good communication. . . . We're very respectful of their quality, they've been together and they're a good team, but with our group, if we have the right mentality we've got a great chance."

The attack-minded play of New England, which is as dangerous as any team in MLS, could actually bode well for Orlando City. The Lions have looked better on the road this season in part because teams play a more open style in their home stadiums, and that has provided more space for Orlando City to exploit when it is on the ball.

If the Lions are able to handle New England's menacing forward line, it could pay dividends when players like Brek Shea, Kaká and Cyle Larin get on the ball in the attacking third.

"When teams come to play against at home they are not scared, but set back about what we're going to do," Lions' midfielder Eric Avila said. "For us, we love going and attacking. If we can handle [New England's forwards] right, I think it'll make a lot of holes for us to counter and be more aggressive going forward."

Easier said than done, of course.

The combination of Davis, Agudelo and Bunbury has combined for seven goals this season, and New England's 12 goals-scored is tied for third-most in MLS behind only FC Dallas and the Seattle Sounders. The Revolution also might be the most in-form team in the league, and currently sit tied atop the Eastern Conference with Orlando City's next opponent: D.C. United.

"We know we've got our hands full," Heath said.

The key for the Lions will be to take advantage of the more open play on Friday night with goals, which have been hard to come by at home this season.

"When teams come here we outplay them and we just can't finish them," Shea said. "We always beat ourselves by not going ahead in the first half and finishing our chances. I'm not really worried about the other team, I'm more worried about us doing something in the final third and producing instead of playing good soccer and not scoring."

ptenorio@orlandosentinel.com