Audi is introducing a "piloted driving" system, which can steer, accelerate, and brake the vehicle by itself in driving at speeds up to 37 mph. As we've heard the automaker mention before, Audi envisions the car being capable of moving itself in and out of parking spaces in the street or in parking garages. If you're forced to park your precious A7 in a tight parking space and won't have much room to open the doors once you've fit into the space, technology like this would make it possible to exit the vehicle before the car moves itself into the space. When the car reaches its final parking position, it turns off the engine, locks the doors, and sends a confirmation to the driver.

On the road, the autonomous driving technology is said to be capable of controlling speed and distance from other cars from speeds ranging from 0-155 mph. When the car comes to a stop, it will automatically accelerating again but if the stop is especially long, the driver must tap the gas pedal to get going again.

The 2013 Consumer Electronics Show also hosts Audi's announcement that it will offer 4G LTE wireless connectivity in cars like the upcoming A3. Aside from providing Wi-Fi hotspot access for up to eight devices, the technology will allow for Google Earth and Google Maps Street View graphics streamed to the vehicle when using the navigation system. Audi connect can also read emails to the driver and dictate text messages. Before the end of 2013, Audi will start offering LTE connectivity in its range in Europe and, probably, in a similar timeframe in the U.S.

The new Audi A3 also appears at CES showing off the automaker's revised MMI that features a control wheel with a touch-sensitive field; we've seen a similar option on the A8. Though American customers may appreciate the ability to write letters or numbers for navigation input, Audi says the tech may be especially useful for Asian customers as it can discern tens of thousands of characters. The navigation information on the Audi A3 is displayed on a seven-inch screen backlit with LEDs.

What intrigues us more is Audi's 3-D display technology. Based on data from a small camera monitoring the driver's eye movements, Audi claims an 11.6-inch display will show a perfect 3-D image. Another part of the feature involves the capability of multiple people seeing 3-D images in the same screen.

We've seen Audis before with speakers that pop up from the corners of the dash; at CES this year, the Audi Q7 sound concept had 23 speakers and an output of about 1400 watts. Audi says the system provides "3-D sound" and will be available on a new car probably at some point in 2014.

Source: Audi