Two women in their 20s, both SAS Nagar residents, were arrested for allegedly assaulting a traffic cop and tearing his uniform on Tuesday. The incident happened on Monday late evening after a 29-year-old woman allegedly jumped a traffic light in Sector 43 and did not stop on a cop’s signal.

Following this, the cops gave a ten minutes chase and finally caught up with the Maruti Suzuki Swift car in their PCR as the woman driver got stuck in the middle of the traffic behind the district court in Sector 43.

However, if the cops expected a tame end to their ordeal by the lawless women ( the police have refused to disclose their identity), they were in for the shock of their lives.

The woman driver started an argument with the cop. Going on to create a further scene, she allegedly went on to smash a beer bottle that she had been carrying in the car on her own head.

The accused did not stop there and went on to tear the cop’s uniform.

Since the incident happened at 6:45pm on Monday, the duty magistrate did not allow the police to arrest the women at night.

Area SHO Ram Dayal told HT, “The women who misbehaved with the cop were in inebriated condition and one of them even hit her own head with a beer bottle on the middle of the road. Had there been no traffic behind district court, the we would have failed to catch the accused. One of the cops has made a video of the entire incident which is in our possession.”

Both the accused were arrested from the main gate of Sector 43 bus stand on Tuesday afternoon and were later produced before the court but the court has bailed out both the accused.

A case under Sections 332 (voluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant from his duty), 353 (assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty) of the IPC has been registered at the Sector 36 police station. Section 332 carries maximum punishment of three-year jail; with a proven offence under 353 punishable with maximum of two-year jail.

First Published: May 10, 2017 09:51 IST