When people think of the technology behind video games and movies, they often just focus on the visuals. True, when creating an immersive experience, the video is probably the most important aspect from a technological perspective. With that said, audio quality is very important too.

Today, Microsoft announces that both Xbox One And Windows 10 will be getting Dolby Atmos support in future updates. If you aren't familiar, it is a surround sound technology with a focus on immersion. Don't have compatible audio hardware? Don't worry -- the Windows-maker is promising a "virtual" Atmos experience too.

"Xbox will be the first game console to feature Dolby Atmos and game developers are excited about using the new capabilities to make their games richer and more engaging. Atmos support for the Blu-ray app on Xbox is already available in Preview and will be released to GA soon -- and we're very excited now to offer Atmos support to games on Xbox One and Windows 10. You'll be able to experience Dolby Atmos in your home theater, assuming you have a Dolby Atmos enabled speaker system or soundbar. But you don’t need to have that kind of equipment -- it will be possible to enable virtually any pair of headphones with the Dolby Atmos experience", says Larry Hryb, Xbox Live's Major Nelson.

Hryb also shares, "of course, Dolby Atmos is great for more than just games. The technology began in the cinema and many of Hollywood's top films are available on Blu-ray disc or streaming with Dolby Atmos sound. With Dolby Atmos, you're immersed in the movie like never before, with sounds moving all around you, just as it does in real life. You'll get that immersive experience whether you’re playing a Dolby Atmos film on your Xbox One or a Windows 10 PC or tablet".

Dolby Atmos support is coming to both the original Xbox One and Xbox One S. Microsoft's newest "S" console features 4K Blu-ray support too -- something the PlayStation 4 does not have. Dolby Atmos is yet another Xbox feature that Sony's consoles lack. While Xbox One got off to a slow start against Sony, it looks like Microsoft is starting to really pull away. In other words, Xbox One could very well win this generation of the console wars.

This addition of Dolby Atmos to Windows 10 will make an already wonderful operating system even better. Seriously folks, if you are clinging to Windows 7 or 8x, it is finally time to move on. Microsoft's latest OS rocks!

Are you excited for Dolby Atmos on Xbox One and Windows 10? Tell me in the comments.

Photo credit: Milles Studio / Shutterstock