As we await the next Alien movie, now is a great time to build your Alien collection and expand your Alien-themed wardrobe. Check out some products below and click here for even more options !

Stay up to date with the latest news and updates on the Alien: Covenant movie sequel, potentially titled Alien: Awakening by liking us on Facebook and by following us on Twitter and Instagram ! You can also subscribe your email to our Alien: Covenant blog for instant notifications of when new posts are made!

The state of the Alien: Covenant sequel continues to remain uncertain. Ridley Scott has mentioned previously that they have a story already in place and know exactly where the sequel to Covenant will go, however the recent acquisition of 20th Century Fox film properties by Disney have potentially put the rumored-to-be-titled Alien: Awakening on hold for the time being. As new details arise concerning Alien: Covenant 2 we will be your premiere source and you can find information on the Covenant sequel by visiting the About Alien: Awakening page here .

If you're a fan of Alien / Prometheus and would like to discuss Alien: Covenant and its upcoming sequel with other like-minded fans, be sure to join in our Alien: Covenant forum ! Ranked the #1 Prometheus forum back in 2012 and reigning as the web's top Alien: Covenant fan site, it's a great place to discuss the upcoming Prometheus sequels, dissect details from every trailer and engage with other fans just like you.

What do you think this could mean for Covenant? Let us know your thoughts in the comments section below!

What exactly this means, we're unsure. It's possible Ridley Scott could be attempting to rewrite Alien history and create a completely new perception of the Alien itself, as well as how we view the original 1979 film. Prometheus certainly took the franchise in a bold new direction, but seemed to use the original Alien as a template for its concepts. By referring to Covenant as a "transformative" story could mean that Scott has moved away from that original template and instead have created a new template for the remaining Prometheus sequels and any future Alien films to follow.

[Katherine and I] both get to do really transformative things in both [Alien and Fantastic Beasts]," Carmen teased. "It's the best thing as an actress when you get to transform constantly.

Alien: Covenant star Carmen Ejogo discussed how the Prometheus sequel will be a "transformative" story for those who have been life-long fans of the Alien franchise. Speaking to Digital Spy yesterday during a promo event for Fantastic Beasts, this is what Carmen had to say:

Acasta Gneiss Nov-16-2016 9:10 AM Perhaps an allusion to a physical change depicted in the film as a process in which the characters remain recognizable enough to be performed by the actors. Possible descriptions of one of the aliens describe it as maintaining a deformed likeness of its host within the carapace. My conjecture from the leaked pics of the big pale xeno head with human like teeth is that it's an engineer/alien, but maybe this is a stage that includes it looking more human.

David 7 Nov-16-2016 9:38 AM Or that transformative could be like Ripley, who went to becoming a survivalist and fighter. These are just colonists in Covenant,so they will have to fight for their lives.

Chris Nov-16-2016 10:31 AM @Acasta, that's a very intriguing theory. I agree the teeth did look rather human, so it's possible it is the result of an Engineer / human transforming. @David007, this could also be true. I definitely see Waterston's character Daniels developing into a Ripley-type character herself.

KMel517 Nov-16-2016 11:22 AM So, from what I understand that in Prometheus David and Shaw took off in another Engineers ship and went out looking for the Engineers home-world or where ever they came from to find out more information about how and why what the Engineers created and wanted to destroy. So is Shaw going to be found dead upon the arrival of the ship in the upcoming movie Covenant? Will there be a side line story line as to what happened to them?

Slavusha Nov-16-2016 11:32 AM Perhaps it will be a love story between an alien and a human. I'd watch that.

BigDave Nov-16-2016 1:38 PM I think this is where we maybe cant read to much into what was said, i dont think they are giving anything away but then maybe she could be giving us a hint? In contrast to her previous appearance in the Movie Fantastic Beasts, well both Ejogo and Waterston..... Its could be a Transitional Change brought upon their state of being as far as Personality, Faith that is transformed by the events of the Movie.. much like how for example if Shaw found that there is no God above the Engineers and she realizes she is tricked by David, her Character would be forced to Transform from a Believer to something entirely new, what impact would it have to find Shaws Faith is Broken, that she has nothing and her Good Nature looking for the Good in things broken too, a Breaking of a Covenant by David for example, would transform Shaw Mentally, Physically more than we saw in Prometheus more than Ripley had done so from Alien to Alien 3.... Maybe it implies this kind of Transformative Process is what the Characters of Carmen Ejogo and Katherine Waterston will go through? Rather than any actual Physical Changes such as say Bruce Banner does to become the Incredible Hulk or Peter Parker to become Spiderman.

BigDave Nov-16-2016 1:49 PM However dont take too much into what i mentioned above, because well i have never seen Harry Potter, yep tried to watch the Franchise but it never apealed to me so i cant say for sure what connection the Fantastic Beasts which is in the same Universe would have to those Characters played by those Actresses. The movie is based of a Book that is like a Encyclopedia for Mythical and Magical Monsters and Beasts, and i assume based in the Harry Potter Universe that meadling in Magical Powers or Artifacts or Spells etc could Summon such Monsters. I think this could connect with Alien Covenant as it could be we see some Meddling going on with Powers/Tools that hold a great degree of Danger in the Wrong Hands.. i.e Black Goo. But i do think that Carmen Ejogo is referring to changes as far as how her Character Transforms from the Role/Purpose she has always thought was her Role/Purpose to then become something Personality wise different due to the Traumatic Events of the Movie. You can only imagine being a Female part of a Couple hoping to settle down and Colonize a World that you thought was Paradise a Earthlike Primordial World to start a fresh life. To then discover it was a place that is home to Humanoid Beings called the Engineers who created Mankind maybe because they could and so there is No God, and these Would Be Gods are far from what you would expect a God to be like. Then finding out some hidden Agenda or being tricked and then having to deal with Deadly Horrific Alien Creatures. Yep... thats ONE JOURNEY thats going to have a Person come out the other end Totally Transformed.

BigDave Nov-16-2016 2:54 PM Looking at the Xenomorph Prop with Human Teeth, if this is more than a concept and is actually something that we would see in the movie, or very close to. Then looking at the Franchise, and Prometheus i can only arrive and 2 Logical Ways for such a Organism. Well ONE That is that its the result of something being infected with Xeno DNA like Fifield Infection only in a more controlled way or by coming into contact with more of the Black Goo. Or similar to Shaws infection only the Xeno DNA not infecting a Egg but a Human Embryo that is at a latter stage. What i am suggesting is the Organism looks like it is a Human/Xeno Hyrbid and much like the one Failed Ripley 8 clones. Then again i did suggest maybe the Eggs are Grown from tiny Parasites and Grow into patches like a Pumpkin Patch and come to think of it...... That one Alien Covenant image does have that Pumpkin Head look to it LOL Joking aside..... I do feel that Pumpkin Head is actually visually very similar to what i would expect a Human/Xeno Hybrid to look like.... for example if a Human was thrown into a Swimming Pool full of Black Goo, the Result would not be far off Pumpkin Head LOL

Chad Ripley Nov-16-2016 3:46 PM I think what everyone said are total possibilities. It could mean they transform mentally into fighters or one of them (I'm thinking Carmen) is gonna become infected with the alien in some way. After seeing that picture of Waterson in a tank top holding a gun it seems like she's our new Ripley. I also think that If the rumor that she's Ripleys mother is true, I don't think that would nessasarly be a bad thing. I know Ridley Scott is aiming for the rafters with this one. I remember seeing an interview or something where he was talking about the force awakens and how that inspired him to get back into his Alien world and reignite it for a new generation. Alien/Aliens and even Alien 3 are my favorite movies ever. With Alien/Aliens being to close to call. Anyway I am really excited about this movie and if he goes with a neomorph instead of a xenomorph that could be cool too. I'm curious as to where he's gonna take this. If the xenomorph is going to show up it won't be til the end of this trilogy he's planning. Maybe we'll get variations of him which could also be cool but not the classic amazing monster.

Chris Nov-16-2016 4:31 PM Welcome to the site Chad Ripley! I agree, I doubt we'll see the classic beast as it were in Alien, until the end of this trilogy/quadrilogy. However the rumor suggesting Daniels is linked to Ripley through blood has be skeptical. I definitely think Daniels will emulate Ripley, but I have a hard time seeing them work her into the story as her mother without it coming across as a stretch. @Slavusha lol yeah wouldn't that be something! Though the Alien is incapable of love. I like to think of them as creations by fallen angels and so they lack a soul. Which makes them so merciless. @KMel517, prior to the script revisions we were told the plot would essentially follow 3 tangents, one of which focused on the Covenant crew, the other on David and Shaw and the third would explore flashback / historical scenes. However, since the revisions it's possible Shaw and David's journey will be left to a later sequel, acting as a prequel to Covenant but also a sequel to Prometheus. Unfortunately since the revisions, we're not exactly sure what stuck and what got changed. It seems as though we come into Covenant at a time when Shaw and David's journey has already ended.

Chris Nov-16-2016 4:35 PM @Big Dave, indeed it could very well be merely a reference to their characters' developments throughout the film. However, Digital Spy's wording seemed to imply that the transformation would more so affect the perceptions of Alien fans as a whole, concerning the franchise and less so the evolution of its characters. But, I could be reading too far into it, I can do that sometimes hahaha.

Aorta Nov-16-2016 5:26 PM I just know this is gonna rock. I can read that into it right now!

Chris Nov-16-2016 5:58 PM Hahaha I'm with you on that as well Aorta! I have high hopes.

Deep Space Nov-17-2016 12:47 AM I'm reading it as we are going to see new and evolving aliens; so the 'transformative' element being what we see happen to the Xeno and thus our understanding of it. As it was said by an actor id assume it also refers to their roles and character development. Who knows how exactly but I am getting the feeling here that Ridley has some shocks in store. All actors involved are, and have been, very tight lipped which can only be a good thing imo! I also have a feeling that the xeno 'fanboys and girls' may be left feeling underwhelmed by AC as it doesn't look like the classic beast will be featuring. The beast was done so I've cooked up a selection of new ones . . . says Ridley ;)

DirtWolf Nov-17-2016 1:23 AM To me it sounds like it will take the story of the Alien franchise as we know it and turn it completely on its head. As in "forget everything you thought you knew about Alien, this is what really happened". It certainly would make for some truly shocking surprises! Oh and @Slavusha God I hope not :)

Thoughts_Dreams Nov-17-2016 7:44 AM As far as the traditional alien (Xenomorph) goes I think that it depends on how many prequels they will do. If AC is the last prequel movie then I think that they can have the Xeno there but if they have planned a trilogy then I think that they should keep it until the last one before we get to Alien (1979). Chad Ripley: I think that it will be interesting to see how the characters will develop in the movie. One problem with Shaw was that she was still the same person throughout the whole movie and a dumb one at that. My favorite alien movie is Alien 3. I agree that it will be interesting to see new monsters.

S.M Nov-17-2016 11:39 AM This 'transformative' quote has been taken out of context to apply to the story as a whole. Ejogo is talking about how their characters transform throughout the story.

Chad Ripley Nov-17-2016 2:34 PM Thank you Chris Picard. I agree that Daniels turning out to be Ripley's mother would be kind of a stretch because that would mean that poor family was cursed by the xenomorph Gods. I also agree Thoughts_Dreams that Alien 3 was a lot better then what people initially thought. If you ever get a chance to watch the Alien box set behind the scenes of that movie you will see how much FOX and a dozen other factors contributed in derailing David Fincher's ideas for that movie. The directors cut which still isn't Fincher's entire vision is better then the theatrical version. You can tell what scenes were added when you watch it because the production value isn't that good. But that version provides more details and character development as well as a better Alien birth scene. I remember being 12 years old seeing Alien 3 in the theater and being upset for that poor dog. Well originally it was suppose to be a giant Ox that was outside when they pulled Ripley out of the crashed ship. An Ox alien is a cooler concept I think, and while I still felt bad for the Ox, it was better then seeing the dog get chestbursted.

I also hope that the characters in Alien Covenant are a lot smarter then the ones in Prometheus. Shaw is apparently in Covenant but I bet she's going to be shown in some kind of David flashback when he's explaining to the new covenant crew what happened when they find him. I could also see David playing a part in her death. Since there are two androids this time, David could be the bad version, while Walter is the good one. The flashback maybe has Shaw and David exploring the Engineers planet but then something goes wrong and Shaw is taken by the Engineers and experimented on with the black goo and maybe something else. I basically think she's going to die in spectacular fashion, with David being a part of that reason, and maybe she dies by a xeno/neo (whatever Ridley is thinking this time) coming out of her. I cannot wait for this come out. Hopefully they release a trailer soon.

BigDave Nov-17-2016 4:23 PM @DirtWolf



Indeed i think thats likely.... or as i and SM have said, rather than it being related to any actual Transformation like we saw with Fifield.



@Thoughts_Dreams



I have always felt Prometheus could have shown a few more clearly clues and we would have had our Xeno answers, and so i do think with this next movie (AC) and Two more they surely cant have the traditional Xeno or even close being on screen for a lot of time in all 3 movies, not when we look like getting a Alien 5 and no doubt Alien 6 if Aliend 5 does well.



So they could somewhat cover the Xeno, and have the next movie cover something else... and the 3rd movie to tie everything into place.



@Chad



Indeed Fincher had some great ideas.



"I remember being 12 years old seeing Alien 3 in the theater and being upset for that poor dog"



I bet at that age especially if your fond of pets.... i watched The Thing when i was about 10-11? And the Dog Town Scene was disturbing and its still the only scene in any movie that makes me feel bad, or grossed out etc....



As for Shaw it would be interesting to see what becomes of her and how she will play in the next movie....



The no mention of her in the Synopsis either means she will play a small part like a Flash Back or she appears at the end.... maybe the survivors uncover Davids Juggernaught and find her there.... or some other fate that has happened.



or she plays a BIG part of the Plot as far as a device.... its fun to speculate that she is envolved in some experiment but we cant be sure.... i had a Source that teased as such.... but i cant say they was even 0% Correct or 100%



But i would edge my bets that Shaw is either.



1) Revealed in a Flash Back Scene.... that explains her fate, maybe the next movie cover this event more?



2)Revealed at the End and the next movie would cover her more.



3) or She will appear shortly only to be killed off.... with no major effect on the Plot which i doubt...



I am betting on Number 1

Chris Nov-17-2016 6:39 PM I am betting on scenario #1 as well. However it is also possible Shaw could be preserved in one of the Engineer stasis pods on board their stolen Juggernaut. I'm sure she would need to utilize them anyways during their journey to Paradise. With no food or water, I don't see her lasting 10 years. It's possible David simply leaves her there while he explores Paradise on his own and as mentioned above, the Covenant crew discover her there. They've done a fantastic job though at keeping her involvement a secret.

Halloway Nov-17-2016 8:05 PM I be very interested to know the details of covenant ,if this is a contract between wyland & yutni,then the old David has to release all his data to new Walter,will he do that?what would be the consequences ? upgrating of David or dismantle him?like blade runner.

DirtWolf Nov-17-2016 11:59 PM @SM Yeah it is most likely being taken out of context. It does make me wonder why they would interpret it that way in the first place. So maybe there is more to it. I was more or less just throwing an alternative guess out there. @BigDave I agree it could mean a physical transformation or a character transformation. Like you said, best not to read too much into it. It does make me wonder why they presented it as some monumental change though. Makes you wonder... As to where Shaw will fit into Covenant... I think it will depend on the plot device they use to introduce the catastrophic event. I could see the Covenant crew arriving at "paradise" and finding an Engineer ship with Shaw inside and in cryosleep by herself with no David in sight. They wake her up and eventually a Chestburster bursts out of her, thus starting the catastrophic event. If that is the case, would she remember that she was infected? If she doesn't, I think that's a perfect way to introduce the aliens and the catastrophic event. If she did remember, then maybe it was just about to burst out of her before she entered cryosleep, and there wasn't enough time to stop it. Although the crew might get infected a different way. There was the leak talking about spores infecting them. If they go this route for the plot device, I think we'll only see Shaw through flashbacks. But I don't know how many people are taking the spore thing as fact. Is there a general consensus on that? The movie can cut back and forth between flashback Shaw and the Covenant crew. Showing how each of them gets infected and seeing how the Covenant crew handles the Alien. Then again, Shaw's flashback could be shorter and we spend more time with the Covenant crew. I really wanna know how Shaw would get infected (which is likely). Did she breathe in spores? Did David experiment on her? Or was it something else? Possibly some form of Xeno. Or a creature that already inhabited the planet and maybe got infected with the black goo? What would be the best ways to infect Shaw and the crew? Where does David come in? Will he be a narrator for a flashback? Will he experiment with the Covenant crew like he did in Prometheus? Or possibly unleash a creature on them that he's concocted in his time alone on the planet?

BigDave Nov-19-2016 9:00 AM Indeed Chris.... it will be interesting to see what becomes of Shaw, maybe its a Flash Back... who knows... if so how and why would they show this... does the Covenant crew know of her and ask about her and David explains something, where we cut to a Flash Back. Do they come across her Dead Body and ask Questions and we get a Flash Back... as i dont think Rappace is cast for just a Dead Body with no actual footage of her in some kind of a performance.



Maybe the Crew of the Covenant or some/one member comes across the Juggernaught and finds Shaw in Cryo Sleep and awakens her and she asks where she is, they explain their situation and Shaw realizes David kept her in Stasis... and warns them of David or the Engineers... who knows.. @DirtWolf Indeed as i have said above and i agree with you that i think despite Shaw not being in the movie for long i think she plays a KEY ROLE to the Plot of a Big Reveal.

Halloway Nov-21-2016 6:38 PM Since Shaw is very spiritual ,l think she will find out that there is good and bad engineer,she drop David and countinue her search for spiritual engineer,once covenant arrived and get to serious trouble,at end when there ship blow up then ,may be they will find a way to contact her for evacuation ....