Cashew Sugared Donut Holes are an original. Little round deep fried donuts are rolled in a coconut maple flavor mixture with finely ground cashews.

There is something that is very enticing about a little round donut. I mean you can pop one in your mount all at once. Nice and neat and clean and delicious.

Donuts are pretty well accepted as a weekend treat. It’s a family affair. When we were kids mom would make us donuts – just once in a while. Sort of like pancakes.

A sweet indulgence that put a smile on everyone’s face.

If you haven’t made donut holes before, this would be a great recipe for your first attempt. Even if they are just for you. Cashew sugared donut holes freeze well so you can save the extras for a later time.

Is it Donut or Doughnut?

One thing we know is how Dunkin’ Donuts thinks it’s spelled.

I may be showing my age but when I was growing up it was Winchell’s Donuts or neighborhood donut shops. I think Dunkin Donuts was only on the east coast.

If you look up information on the word donut on the internet it switches automatically to doughnut.

It turns out doughtnut is the original spelling and it was shortened in America for certain instances. Such as for the 1939 World’s Fair and by Dunkin Donuts in the 40’s.

Not that it wasn’t misspelled a couple of times before that but now it can be spelled either way.

If you have a deep fryer then you can absolutely use it instead of a frying pan. Heat enough oil to cover the little donut holes and then carefully drop in about 4 holes at a time.

You don’t want to overcrowd or cool the oil so a few at a time works great. Then set on a plate that has a couple of paper towels on it so that the extra oil can drain off the donuts.

Also, have you ever have a donut that you didn’t like? Me either. Let’s make some!

Want to try these Cashew Sugared Donut Holes? PIN IT to your Main Dish or Pasta board to save for later! Find me on Pinterest for more great recipes!

Print 5 from 5 votes Cashew Sugared Donut Holes Cashew Sugared Donut Holes are an original. Prep Time 20 minutes Cook Time 20 minutes Total Time 40 minutes Servings 36 Donut Holes Calories 44 kcal Author Ginny McMeans Ingredients 1 all-purpose flour

1/2 cup whole wheat pastry flour

1 teaspoon baking powder

1 teaspoon baking soda

1/3 cup coconut sugar

1/2 teaspoon salt

1 egg substitute - of your choice

1/2 cup dairy-free milk such as cashew or almond milk

2 tablespoons dairy-free butter - melted

Coconut Oil - for deep-fat frying Cashew Sugar Crumb Mixture 1/4 cup dairy-free butter - melted, for rolling - not to go in the crumb mixture

1/2 cup cashews

2 tablespoons coconut sugar

2 tablespoons brown sugar Instructions In a large bowl add the flour, baking powder, baking soda, coconut sugar and salt.

In a separate small bowl mix the egg substitute, dairy-free milk and non-dairy butter. Mix well.

Add the wet ingredients to the dry ingredients.

Heat oil in a deep fryer to 375°.

When the temperature is reached drop dough by a heaping tablespoon full into oil. You can scoop the dough off of the spoon with another spoon if necessary.

Do not crowd. Cook about 5 at a time depending on the size of your deep fryer. They will float to the top.

Fry until browned. They only take about 2 minutes. Flip over once during frying.

When finished frying, remove and set on paper towels to drain . Cashew Sugar Crumb Topping Place the cashews and both sugars in a food processor.

Pulse until cashews are very small crumbs

Pour out into a plate for rolling.

Lightly/quickly roll each doughnut in the melted butter and firmly roll in the crumb mixture.

Roll all of the donut holes in this way and then let cool completely before packing in a tightly covered container. Notes Nutrition Nutrition Facts Cashew Sugared Donut Holes Amount Per Serving (1 Donut Hole) Calories 44 Calories from Fat 18 % Daily Value* Total Fat 2g 3% Sodium 85mg 4% Potassium 33mg 1% Total Carbohydrates 4g 1% Sugars 2g Vitamin A 0.1% Calcium 1.1% Iron 1.1% * Percent Daily Values are based on a 2000 calorie diet.

How about some donuts that you’ve had had anything like before. These are just great!

Baked Trail Mix Donuts

You might as well make these perfect baked donuts too!

Maple Glazed Donuts