We may earn money from the products/companies mentioned in this post. As an Amazon Associate I earn from qualifying purchases.

Pizza Bowl

An easy, 5 minute lunch full of all the flavors of pizza and none of the carbs! No special ingredients required! This Pizza Bowl is so easy to make!

This post contains affiliate links which provide me with a small commission when you make a purchase through those links. The profits go to the support of my family and this blog. Thank you!

I don’t know about you, but planning ahead is half the battle for me. I know that when I plan ahead what I am going to eat I do a much better job of staying on plan. However, I do not always do that, even though I know I should! (Just being honest!)

About two weeks ago I decided it would be a good idea to keep cooked hamburger in my refrigerator for quick and easy lunches. That, I must say, was a marvelous idea! I have used it several times for taco meat, cheeseburger salad, and for this amazing recipe I am sharing today – this delicious Pizza Bowl!

It only takes about 10 minutes to fry up a couple pounds of hamburger (or venison in my case), and it is so handy to have in the fridge, just waiting for your culinary imaginations! This easy recipe is a great example!

Most people love pizza, and I am no exception. My absolute favorite low-carb pizza crust recipe is the Perfect Pizza Crust (page 211 in the Trim Healthy Mama Cookbook ). I love that recipe, but I don’t always want to take the time to make it (lazy or Drive Through Sue – you decide). That is where the idea for this recipe comes in – an easy microwaveable pizza bowl that gives you all the flavor in just a couple of minutes (providing you have the burger already cooked).

I may or may not have had this three times this past week! I used hamburger, but this would be really amazing with cooked Italian sausage!

Be sure to sign up with your email address so you can receive all my new recipes delivered right to your inbox! (Look for the sign-up box at the top of this post.) Also, be sure to follow me on Facebook, Pinterest, Instagram, and Twitter!

Print Recipe Pizza in a Bowl {Low Carb, THM-S} All the flavors of pizza, but no crust, and considerably less carbs! Calories: 426 kcal Ingredients 1/2 Cup Cooked Hamburger can use Venison as well

1/2 Cup Shredded Mozzarella Cheese

1/4 - 1/2 Cup Sugar Free Pizza Sauce

8-10 Slices Pepperoni

Garlic Salt

Dried Oregano Instructions In a microwaveable cereal bowl, layer half the hamburger, half the pepperoni, half the pizza sauce, and half the cheese.

Sprinkle garlic salt and oregano to taste.

Layer remaining ingredients.

Sprinkle garlic salt and oregano again.

Microwave for 2 minutes, or until cheese is bubbly. Notes I like to use Great Value Pizza Sauce - it has no sugar and only 3 net carbs for 1/4 cup. Nutrition Serving: 1 Recipe | Calories: 426 kcal | Carbohydrates: 9 g | Fat: 31 g | Fiber: 2 g

If you like this recipe, you may enjoy my Pizza Muffin in a Mug recipe or my Pizza Meatball Casserole!