Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump gave a speech in Pennsylvania on Saturday, Oct. 1. He also issued a statement in response to a bombshell New York Times story about his taxes. He said 12 false things: 1. Falsely said, “We have the support of the Hispanics and the African-Americans.” (Trump is losing by massive margins with Hispanics and African-Americans.)

Donald Trump's battle with the truth continued Saturday. ( Evan Vucci / The Associated Press )

2. Falsely said the New York Times “illegally obtained” his tax information. (A reporter simply opened her mail; the documents were sent to her.) 3. Falsely said, “They say she’s worth $200, $250 million.” (Reports the Washington Post: “In the Clintons’ 2015 personal financial disclosure form, they reported valued assets ranging from $11.3 million to $52.7 million. This number does not reflect homes that the Clintons own. In 2015, Forbes estimated their combined net worth at $45 million.”) 4. Falsely said, “She also wants to shut down production of shale energy.” (Clinton has called for strict new restrictions, but not a shutdown. “With strong safeguards in place, natural gas can play an important role in our transition to a clean energy economy,” she has said.)

Article Continued Below

5. Falsely said, “We don’t make anything anymore.” (Manufacturing represented 12 per cent of the American economy in 2015.) 6. Falsely said the U.S. has China “trade deficits of $400, $500 billion a year.” (The deficit was about $330 billion last year including services, $367 billion with goods alone. It may be lower this year.) 7. Falsely said: “It’s not like, ‘Oh gee do you think she’s guilty?’ They’ve actually admitted she’s guilty.” (No authority has “admitted” that Clinton is guilty of crimes related to her emails.) 8. Falsely said of Bill Clinton, “He can’t practise law. He can’t be a lawyer. He was a lawyer. He can’t be a lawyer.” (Clinton was not disbarred over his sex scandals. His Arkansas law license was suspended for five years. While he can’t currently work as a lawyer, he could do so within a week or so if he wanted to: Applications for reinstatement are “routinely approved,” a senior official of the Arkansas legal body said in 2006, when he became eligible for reinstatement.) 9. Falsely said, “Like the European Union, she wants to erase our borders.” (Clinton is not proposing to erase borders or create anything like the European Union.)

10. Falsely said of Clinton’s refugee policy: “She wants people to pour into our country without knowing who they are.” (Clinton is not proposing a loosening of the strict screening process for refugees.) 11. Falsely said, “Here’s a person who’s only worked for government, essentially.” (Clinton’s private-sector career was cut short by Bill’s political career, but she worked non-government jobs for several years as a young woman: Lawyer at the Children’s Defense Fund and later Rose Law Firm, and instructor at the University of Arkansas law school. She also served on corporate boards, including Walmart’s.)

Article Continued Below

12. Falsely said, “Favours and access were granted to those who wrote checks. She put the secretary of state up for sale.” (There is no evidence Clinton sold favours or tried to.) 13. Misleadingly claimed endorsements from “the Border Patrol, ICE.” (Unions representing officers of these agencies have endorsed him, not the agencies themselves.)

Read more about: