

Each week The Republican and MassLive showcase dogs and cats available for adoption at shelters at rescue organizations in Western Massachusetts.

With the participation of the shelters listed below, many animals should be able to find a permanent home.

In addition, we'll include on occasion pet news and animal videos in this weekly feature.

Some news update:

Free cat adoption marathon

WESTFIELD — The Westfield Homeless Cat Project is holding a four-day Cat Adoption Marathon through Sunday from 11 a.m. until 7 p.m. at 1124 East Mountain Road.

The cats can be adopted for free by those who can provide a qualified home and make a monetary donation in any amount to the Westfield Homeless Cat Project.

The organization is loaded with cats from several recent rescues including: 35 cats dumped and left to starve in Southwick, 11 cats from a filthy trailer in Southampton, and cats from a hoarding situation in Westfield.

The adult cats are neutered/spayed, up-to-date on vaccinations, tested for FIV/Felv, free of fleas and worms, and come with a bag of cat food.

Funds are desperately needed to treat these cats, all of which needed to be spayed/neutered and required additional vet care. Contributions can be sent to: Westfield Homeless Cat Project, 1124 East Mountain Road, Westfield, MA 01085. Email westfieldhcp@aol.com.



Official Statement from Leslie Harris, executive director, Dakin Humane Society



SPRINGFIELD — Recently several incidents have been reported to Dakin Humane Society involving individuals who have been collecting money on Dakin’s behalf in outdoor parking lots of popular stores and restaurants in Springfield, West Springfield and Holyoke.

The solicitors are described as women, usually two working together, with small dogs on leashes. They are collecting money in coffee cups, and they tend to approach people as they are entering or leaving their vehicles. Unlike most legitimate solicitors, they don’t collect at or near the doors of these establishments, and they are known to become rude and defensive when their legitimacy has been questioned. Despite their claims to be collecting funds on Dakin’s behalf, we have seen no evidence of this.

The police have been notified about this activity and will be on the lookout for these individuals.

If you are approached by someone you feel is not legitimately soliciting funds on Dakin’s behalf, please follow your instincts. We’d certainly welcome your donations, but only if they’re received through legitimate channels. You can always donate online at dpvhs.org or bring or mail your donations to Dakin Humane Society. We’d also ask that if you are approached by someone who fits the above description, please call us at (413) 781-4000, extension 122.

Dakin Humane Society is fortunate to be the recipient of donations resulting from many grassroots efforts, and we hope this continues to be the case. Community loyalty to Dakin runs very deep, and we would not want to see the efforts of classrooms full of children, scout camps, or groups of coworkers to solicit donations on Dakin’s behalf come under suspicion because of the actions of these people.

For anyone who is planning to collect funds or items to benefit Dakin, we ask that you contact us first at (413) 781- 4000, extension 136. We will ask you to fill out a simple form that will officially register your fundraising effort and allow us to stay apprised of your efforts on our behalf, for which we thank you.

Elephant pool party at Oregon Zoo

LOCAL SHELTERS:



Dakin Pioneer Valley Humane Society





Address: 163 Montague Road, Leverett

Hours: Tuesday-Sunday, noon-4:30 p.m.

Telephone: (413) 548-9898

Website: www.dpvhs.org



Address: 171 Union St., Springfield

Hours: Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday, noon-5:30 p.m.; Thursday, noon-7:30 p.m.; Saturday, Sunday, noon-4:30 p.m.

Telephone: (413) 781-4000

Website: www.dpvhs.org



Thomas J. O'Connor Animal Control and Adoption Center

Address: 627 Cottage St., Springfield

Hours: Monday, Tuesday, Saturday, noon-4 p.m.; Thursday, noon-7 p.m.

Telephone: (413) 781-1484

Website: tjoconnoradoptioncenter.com

Westfield Homeless Cat Project

Address: 1124 East Mountain Road

Hours: Adoption clinics, Thursday, 5-7 p.m.; Saturday, 11 a.m.-3 p.m.

Website: http://www.whcp.petfinder.com

Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/westfieldhomelesscatprojectadoptions



Westfield Regional Animal Shelter

Address: 178 Apremont Way

Hours: Monday-Friday, noon-5 p.m.; Saturday, 10 a.m.-4 p.m.

Telephone: (413) 564-3129

Website: http://www.petfinder.com/shelters/ma70.html

Franklin County Sheriff's Office Regional Dog Shelter and Adoption Center

Address: 10 Sandy Lane, Turners Falls

Hours: Monday-Thursday, 9 a.m.-2 p.m., Friday-Saturday, 9 a.m.-1 p.m.

Telephone: (413) 676-9182

Website: http://fcrdogkennel.org/contact.html