Be on the lookout for these 15 fugitives from Harris and Montgomery counties

Santiago Gonzalez, 32, is wanted in Harris County on a charge of capital murder. Photo: Harris County Sheriff's Office Santiago Gonzalez, 32, is wanted in Harris County on a charge of capital murder. Photo: Harris County Sheriff's Office Photo: Harris County Sheriff's Office Photo: Harris County Sheriff's Office Image 1 of / 30 Caption Close Be on the lookout for these 15 fugitives from Harris and Montgomery counties 1 / 30 Back to Gallery

Harris County authorities are looking for five fugitives, including four men and one woman.

One of the men, Santiago Gonzalez, 32, is wanted on a charge of capital murder for his alleged involvement in a fatal shooting at a game room.

At about 7:30 a.m. Aug. 5, 2012, Gonzalez was with two other men at a game room in the 7300 block of Interstate 10 in East Harris County.

A witness told sheriff's deputies that she saw Gonzalez shoot a security guard in the head in the course of stealing money from the game room. He has not been arrested, according to law enforcement records.

Other Harris County fugitives of the week include Ines Rocha, 28, who is charged with aggravated assault with a deadly weapon, and Julio Davila, 32, who is charged with aggravated sexual assault of a child.

Also on Harris County's list are J.C. Pratt, 42, wanted on a charge of robbery and threats, and Mark Martin, 20, charged with aggravated robbery with a deadly weapon.

Anyone with information on the Harris County defendants is asked to call Crime Stoppers at 713-222-TIPS (8477) or submit a tip though iWatchHarrisCounty.

Montgomery County is seeking 10 fugitives, some of whom have been featured in earlier weeks.

Shane Michael Dunn, 39, is charged with injury to a disabled individual; Robert Marion Russell, 25, is charged with possession of a controlled substance; and Buffy Marie Jacobs, 42, is charged with forgery from an elderly individual.

Montgomery County is also looking for Dawn Slach-Campbell, 35, wanted on a charge of theft; Danielle Latrey Taylor, 30, is charged with murder; Eliud Xavier Garza, 22, is charged with injury to a disabled individual; and Amanda Destiny Milo, 18, is charged with burglary of a residence.

Other Montgomery County fugitives are Michael Perry, 48, is wanted on a charge of possession with intent to deliver a controlled substance; Judy Ann Harrison, 40, is charged with possession of a controlled substance; and Shakola Antoinette White, 25, is charged with theft, with two or more previous convictions.