Ship Naming:

Updated Comms Panel:

Not 100% sure <- Sandro I believe this is a specific question asking if we could block someone based on their in game name like finding friends but the opposite.

Camera

Megaships

Asteroid Bases

General 2.3 related

Bugs, balance and Issues

Exploration & Visual

General Visual

Hardware/Software support

PS4:

Bookmarks

BGS & NPCs

Missions

Ships, weapons, modules & storage

Horizons Season & Updates Questions

Engineers:

2.4 Questions

General Plans

Ship Visuals & Livery

Misc:

Statements:

So sorry I'm not going to add exact answers for everything. Lave Radio did a good summary, look there please :)Any chance for name plates without any additional decorations, only text?Will ship nameplates be store only items or will one/some come as standard?Given that we will now have ship IDs, will our call-signs change according to the ship ID instead of CMDR name? Could this option be added?Is it true that the only way for your ship's name to show up in another person's scan is if you have purchased a name plate from the cash shop? If yes does this mean the DDF discussions around ship specific bounties, ship reputation etc are no longer valid?Given the comments about the "block player" feature in the 16/02/2017 stream, has the actual blocking method changed or simply the method by which players block other players?Will this block feature be available on the main menu search function so we don't have to instance with them to block them?Have there been discussions around the comms panel colours, for example direct messages are easy to miss between the frequent and almost identical looking fighter pilot messages?Will there be an option to have the HUD start as hidden on the camera mode instead of visible so we can go straight into filming with no HUD to make a smoother transition for videos?Will planet based camera limit be extended to 2500m rather 250m?Can we please have that big nasty bounding cube removed (in favor of the normal ship collision mesh) so we can get the camera close to the ships?Has any thought been given to a "store view" function so we can quickly swap between a specific camera and normal flying instead of re-setting the camera up each time we activate/deactivate?Recently the ability to use the external camera during hyperspace has been removed (both debug and suite), is there a reason for this? Can we expect the return of this functionality because hyperspace from the cockpit looks awesome?What relevance will the new (dockable?) Megaships have for the BGS? New markets, mission locations, faction specific tasks etc?With Mega-ships being dockable will capital ships become dockable too at some stage?Can megaships be attacked or are they invulnerable like stations?How important do Frontier see megaships in the future gameplay of Elite?Are there/will there be Ice Asteroid bases?Will there be any pirate/outlaw-focused asteroid bases with the pirate holograms etc? Or are they always going to be extraction/mining-themed?What features of 2.3 are passed to non-horizons owners?Will there be the possibility of helm control in multicrew, this is huge for explorers who want to share some of the journey? With no control, rewards, tags etc all there is for crew-members to do is share the sights which won't feel as involved. There will be little difference between joining a ship in say the Veil Nebula to watching a video of someone in the Veil nebula. Even if this requires a special sign-off by the ship owner to take full responsibility for any mishaps.Is there a possibility that at some point multicrew will be extended to full functionality with 2+ players having full access to helm, co-op missions etc?Will there be improvements to prevent multicrew server disconnects or can these issues even be addressed?Will there be further graphical downgrades as part of 2.3?What, if any, Background Sim tweaks/changes are coming to 2.3?Will the BGS "pass" over the missions mooted in the December Dev Livestream be conducted for 2.3? (mission destinations, passenger mission effects, inf/rep etc)Will the surface economy types be represented within the galaxy map, is there a plan to enhance that?How will mining turrets work without a gunner as asteroids can not be targeted? Any way of linking these so they can target prospector tagged rocks?Any response to the allocation of engineer grades throughout the unlock tree discussed here ? DNYI : Why was the starting level for the diminishing returns set so it affects non-horizons & non-engineered ship users when the intent was to counter stacked modifications?)Will the Colonia bubble have its own ship crash sites in 2.3? Tip offs in Colonia region lead pilots to the old bubble's systems now.Any fix for: Keyb and Mouse flight not moving pilot's right hand?Since you are adding Trappist-1 to the galaxy is great how about adding Cassiopeia A?Will Ram Tah's scanner tech used to locate Guardian structures be extended to allow for faster location of other surface features (i.e. abandoned settlements)?Will star colours in 2.3 continue to be based solely on spectral type or are there plans to vary it by temperature to make systems/planets more varied?Can we get an update on the (rough) number of systems explored/visited by CMDRs?Could we have the text from scanned visitor beacons written into the journal?Can you provide a summary or any information around the number of organic structure types and if possible any hints to help us track down ones that haven't been seen before?Fungal Trees have been found, are these tied to the guardians? Are there other tree-variants on different planet types to be found?Can Frontier give a statement as to the FSD distance and their feelings on it's state as many are arguing the current (up to) 4.6x increase to base FSD jump is too little and some that it is too much?Will there be options added to plot more complex routes, for example via waypoints (systems/stations) or set up a loop route etc?Will there be an option in the future to automatically adjust a route plotted after getting a FSD boost with a neutron star?Any plans to allow faster supercruise travel within systems?Any plans for future galaxies such as Andromeda etc?Any comments on the tons of ideas and concepts that ToCoSo put together?Have you considered offering a combined Advanced and Detailed surface scanner unit, for a slightly greater cost of both units?Any timescale on when comets and accretion disks might appear in the game? ( Dave G : and other phenomena such as meteors etc)Any news on the Orrery Map?Will Telescopes ever come for explorers for basic discovery scanning at very long range?Any news on micro jumps between stars in a system, are these rejected/planned/in-development?Any chance of astronomical information for a selected planet under the info tab without having to system map each time?Any update on the multiple light sources for higher quality graphics settings?Any plans to let players store tourist beacon/obelisk data in game or in the journal so we can refer back to them?With the increase to exploration payouts (thank you!) will exploration ranks also be rebalanced as this is the second time that exploration credits have got an increase yet the rank requirements appear unchanged? Is this possibly due to "downranking" people if the requirements are upped?Will there be a Trailer competition, given how successful the last one was, and how good the 2.3 videos already are?Can/will COBRA take advantage of multi-core CPU capability in terms of number of threads?Any update on console-PC crossplay?Can we know when you are planning to announce a release date for the PS4 version of the game? Or any new info about it? Stormyuk : Will it be linked to the 2.3 PC release?ill PS4 version have shareplay option?Are there any planned add-ons for the PS4 version, IE: Profile avatars of powerplay logos/ships, wallpapers, ShareFactory themes?Can you go into more detail on the differences between PS4 and PS4pro? You said performance, is this purely framerates or are there graphical differences?Will the Cobra IV be available to PS4 players? If so how?Will bookmarks (for planets/stations) ever be shown on the radar in supercruise or navigation panel?Any plans to allow players to bookmark persistent things like RES sites, Tourist Beacons etc?Could we have droppable beacons to bookmark specific coordinates/locations on planets (visible to the player only), to allow for an easy return?Can we please get enhancements to bookmark organisation? eg: folders; grouping; tagging etc. (Colours?)Will we ever see explicit links between Powers and Factions/Powers & the BGS? E.g. system states impacting powerplay faction support, faction missions etc?Any plans to develop player minor factions into something more involved?Is persistence of NPCs between instances as good as it is ever likely to get?Any plans to voice the NPC text messages such as "I'm going to boil you up?"If there is life on a part of a planet, wouldn't that life spread out to other parts and adapt to different environmental conditions, even if this planet has no atmosphere?Will the BGS in Colonia and the player integration ever evolve to have their actions affect the cmdr positively and negatively from their work for a faction?Any news on Tier 1 NPC's?SafteyBotWill there be a way for player groups and others to attract megaships to systems for a certain time for example via community goals etc?Any chance of getting NPCs in CG systems in trade ships to carry cargo for the CG?Learn BGS may be long in Elite, a PS4 player may not be aware of the tutorial about BGS make by community in forum, will the interface of the game evolve in the future to bring more precision about BGS in the game ? Edited here : Are the chained missions linear or branching (Decision trees)?Can we get some juicy missions which require the Cmdr. to use specific small ships (f.e Cobra/Viper/Eagle)?Does Colonia fight with the bubble for CG slots (non-expansion initiative)? If so, is there a chance Colonia could be given it's own CG slot?Are there plans to put full motion video/audio into the mission board process in the future?Do unpaid fines/bounties, speeding tickets etc affect the quality/quantity of missions given in said location?When favours get added will we be able to request mission rewards for specific materials/commodities?Will the Colonia faction give players passenger mission for exploring tourist beacon nearby, Saggitarius A for example? They give missions to the old bubble and Jaques only now.Any plans to introduce a way of quickly swapping loadouts for a particular ship?Any plans to increase the storage limits on modules/weapons? ( Teeth_03 : Data/material also?)Any plans to remove the module requirement for the docking computer? (Alexbrentnall: Or extend it to an undocking computer as well?)Any plans for other types of locked modules in addition to combat/passenger such as exploration etc?Will we get heat sink, chaff or point defence synthesis?Can we please have multi-function limpet controllers? ie: a size 3A controller with the functions of 1A Fuel Transfer and 1A Repair controllers.Any plans to make limpets ammo that don't require cargo space, any plans to make them re-stockable via synthesis?During the beta for 2.2.03 it was mentioned that the big 3 would be getting an increase to their hull amount. Will they be receiving this in 2.3?From what I've seen of the beta videos; plasma accelerators can wipe 50% of your shields with one shot and shield boosters are nerfed. How is this in any way "balanced"? More like open season for the NPCs on the big ships.Any reason why plasma accelerators don't exist in Class 1 to help out small ships vs the big ones?Have there been any thoughts about allowing weaponless ships to have the ability to have stronger shields, compared to a fully kitted out combat ship?Will Capital ships' weapons have the same penetration value or will it be adjusted to the new changes to the big 3?Can we have a spaceloach bobblehead please?Can the roles/playstyles search function of multicrew also be applied to Wings in future? Eg to find players in game to wing up with for multi-crew style gameplay goals eg legal Bounty Hunting, illegal Piracy etc.Are we going to be able to land on atmosphere-less lava planets before Season 3?Will we ever be able to use favours to adjust Engineer Upgrade stats, & not just merely Weapon Special Effects?Engineer Special effects, have you considered having these as dedicated engineer blueprints and eliminate random special effects?Are there any improvements in the works for enginering to reduce/remove RNG? For example "Duplicate mod" for other weapons and or increased material/data cost for better chances of better results?Will there be mining laser engineer blueprints?What is the future of multicrew for the upcoming updates (2.4, 3.0 and beyond)?Mixup, this was in the last section but got answered after Q1 from 2.4 section:Why can't we just view available engineer schematics remotely? Pinning system is lame.Can you please confirm that 2.4 will not be combat related?Is there interest in a planned re-run of the ship transfer time poll? (AlexBrentnall: Is there interest in a slider mechanic with more cash for faster transfer options?)Any plans to implement a radio function into Elite?Does the current iteration of multi-crew rule out any future ability to crew a ship when we can physically walk aboard other players vessels?Any plans to create areas for heavily engineered ships above and beyond the difficulty of the current Assassination missions/Haz Res?With credits being easier to come by for wings and multi-crewed ships will there ever be a "hard mode" introduced either for AI difficulty, credit earning difficulty or both?When is there going to be an iron-man mode?Could Frontier (maybe after the Q&A livestream) publish a list of the things that are considered placeholders or desired areas for development? This could be done without spoiling anything or promising anything but would give players an idea of what areas are planned to be improved down the line and presumably allow us to both speculate and suggest.( Chrizhanna : Could FDev do a mini-Kickstarter style aspirational goals type thing, no details no timelines?)Is there a chance of having more foreign characters implemented into the game? Specifically Polish characters, but of course other languages too.Will the gold Anaconda ever come back for sale?Will the other limited ship skins ever come backup for sale? (eg. Chrome / silver Viper MK3)Will the Braben bobblehead ever make a return or has it been perma-banned?Can we get the windshield smudges removed from the external camera?harakan ( ForumsQ&A thread ): Any chance of a holo-me to bobblehead convertor? E.g. Buy a "mannequin" bobblehead, and a one-time button to apply the current holo-me to it as a permanent design?Could we get some different interiours for Viper4, Cobra4, Keelback,DBX & other ships that are based off some "base ships"?Would it be possible to get packs of paint colours that apply to all ships/vehicles instead of a pack for 1 ship? Will there be Fed/Emp/Alliance themed paintpacks?What is your favourite Colour?Thanks for the powerplay decalsExplorers are desperate to have new tools/content!Blocking a player should NOT cause them to de-instance with you, solely because a hostile player group intent on damaging background simulations can abuse the feature to avoid intervention.