Conservative talk show host Glenn Beck says that Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney lost the final debate because he was “being guided” by God to be “less contentious” and agree with President Barack Obama.

Although Obama was aggressive throughout the Monday’s debate, Romney used a softer strategy, repeatedly endorsing the current administration’s positions on Afghanistan, Iraq, Iran, Syria and the use of drones. The tactic clearly worked for the president because instant polls conducted by CBS News and CNN showed that he won decisively.

While conservative columnist Ann Coulter joked that Romney was simply being “kind and gentle to the retard,” Beck was clearly disgusted with the Republican nominee’s performance, tweeting, “I am so glad mitt agrees with Obama so much. No, really. Why vote?”

But by Tuesday, the conservative radio host seemed to have come to terms with Romney’s loss, chalking it up to God’s will.

“I believe Mr. Romney prays on his knees every day,” Beck said during his radio program. “I know he prays before the debate. I don’t know if it was the right thing, but I believe he’s being guided. And I believe he feels it’s important to be less contentious. It may be that he’s doing exactly what the Lord wants him to do right now.”

“A lot of people who are conservatives who have been walking down this road for a long time, we wanted him to eviscerate the president last night, metaphorically speaking. But our ways aren’t necessarily His ways. And I hope and pray and believe Mitt Romney is trying to seek out His way.”





He added: “Last night, you saw somebody who took the stage who appeared to me to be George Washington.”

Speaking to his radio listeners last month, Beck said that Romney’s poll numbers had fallen as a part of a plan from God to make it obvious to the American people that divine intervention was responsible when Republicans took the White House in November.

“I am to the point that — God is trying to make this so clear to us that if it happens, it’s his finger,” he explained.

Watch this video via Right Wing Watch, uploaded Oct. 24, 2012.