



A MAN WAS arrested following a standoff with police at about 9:30 a.m. Friday, April 24, in the 5400 block of West Roscoe Street, according to 16th (Jefferson Park) District police.

A 30-year-old man called police and reported that an armed man was knocking at his door, and when officers arrived they heard the caller shouting from inside his residence and a woman shouting to the officers that the man was in need of medical attention and that he was suffering from seizures, according to police.

When officers forced the door open, the man approached one of the responding officers and threatened him with a loaded crossbow, according to police. The officers retreated and called for the Hostage Barricade and Terrorist unit, police said.

The woman left the residence at about 2:15 p.m., and the man was arrested at about 3:30 p.m., according to police. Both individuals were transported to Community First Hospital for treatment and observation, police said.

The suspect was identified by police as Simone Bolum, age 30, of the Roscoe Street address.

EMPLOYEES OF the Sports Awards store, 5544 W. Armstrong Ave., reported that a man fired a gun at the business at about 6 p.m. Friday, April 24, according to 16th (Jefferson Park) District police.

The employees reported that they heard three gunshots and that one of the bullets entered the business through a side window and deflected into the office, according to police. A witness reported that she saw a man standing on the sidewalk in the 5600 block of North Elston Avenue firing a handgun toward the business, and police recovered three spent shell casings at the scene and one slug inside the business, police said.

A PIZZA delivery driver reported that he was robbed at about 12:20 a.m. Saturday, April 25, in the 4100 block of North Marmora Avenue, according to 16th (Jefferson Park) District police.

The 20-year-old man reported that three men approached him while he was delivering food and that one of them threatened him with a handgun while the other two took his cell phone, $100 in cash and the delivery bag containing food from him, according to police. The man said that the resident at the delivery address said that he did not order food from the business, police said.

TWO MEN were arrested following an incident at about 11:30 p.m. Thursday, April 23, in the 4000 block of North Long Avenue, according to 16th (Jefferson Park) District police.

A 37-year-old man reported that two men had trespassed onto his property and that they refused to leave, and the men were arrested after officers found them sitting on a bench on the man’s front porch, according to police. One of the men also was charged with a parole violation, and at the police station he threw his body against a wall and a table and then attacked three police officers, police said.

The suspects were identified by police as Joshua Carrasquillo, age 21, of the 2700 block of North Neva Avenue, who was charged with the parole violation and with trespass, and Estaban Perez, age 18, of the 700 block of West Waveland Avenue, who was charged with trespass, police said.

A MAN REPORTED that he was robbed at about 4:50 a.m. Wednesday, April 22, in the 5000 block of North Austin Avenue, according to 16th (Jefferson Park) District police.

The 24-year-old man reported that he had arranged to meet a woman he had met online at a gas station and that when the woman arrived, two men were with her and one of the men entered his vehicle with a handgun and took his wallet, a set of keys and his cell phone valued at $700, according to police.

A MAN WAS arrested following an incident at about 11:30 p.m. Wednesday, April 22, in the 3200 block of North Cicero Avenue, according to 16th (Jefferson Park) District police.

Officers attempted to stop a vehicle that was speeding and swerving and that had driven through a stop sign, and when officers approached the vehicle the driver reversed his car, struck their squad car, drove toward one of the officers and fled, according to police. Responding officers stopped the man in an alley and the man was arrested after he reversed his vehicle and struck their squad car twice, then got out of his vehicle and crawled underneath it, police said.

The suspect was identified by police as Rocky R. Colon, age 25, of the 4800 block of West George Street.

A WOMAN reported that she was attacked and robbed at about 9:35 p.m., Tuesday, April 21, in the 3700 block of North Lavergne Avenue, according to 16th (Jefferson Park) District police.

The 35-year-old woman reported that a man approached her from behind, put his arm around her neck, punched her in the face, kicked her as she fell to the ground and took her backpack, according to police.

A MAN REPORTED that his home in the 5300 block of North Oconto Avenue was burglarized between 5:30 p.m. Saturday, April 26, and 9 a.m. the following day, according to 16th (Jefferson Park) District police.

The man reported that he discovered that the lock on his shed door had been broken and that a Toro lawn mower valued at $500, a Craftsman snow blower valued at $650 and an outdoor fire pit valued at $80 were missing from the shed, and that two tool boxes containing tools valued at $350 and a wooden dolly valued at $90 were missing from his carport, according to police.

A WOMAN reported that a man broke into her home in the 6200 West Cornelia Avenue at about 5 p.m. Saturday, April 25, according to 16th (Jefferson Park) District police.

The 72-year-old woman reported that a man knocked at her front and rear door several times and then entered her home after he pried open the rear door, according to police. The woman reported that she confronted the man in the rear porch area and that he apologized to her and ran to a pickup truck in the alley containing two other occupants, police said.



