Wild Rose Restaurant

The Wild Rose Restaurant is a charming space with mountain views. Homemade wood-fired bread and pizza meet seasonal salads and classic grilled plates from a world-influenced menu. Seafood creations come from the nearby Maine coast, guaranteeing the freshest, most delicious seafood in all of New Hampshire. Our famous Baked Lobster dish is a favorite special item with our summer guests, check out the recipe here!

After dinner, save room for a crème bruleè, chocolate bomb or one of our other indulgent desserts. In addition to the valley's finest cuisine, our staff presents you with friendly, personal service. There's a reason why North Conway's residents come to our restaurant. There's no better place for dining in North Conway.

Enjoy the tastiest restaurant in North Conway, NH without leaving the Manor. Once our patio, now an ideal dining spot, our restaurant welcomes you to dine and chat. Wide windows bask the dining room in natural sunlight, while also granting you wide valley views. The Wild Rose Restaurant will treat you to delicious flavors, from signature sourdough pizzas invented by the Manor's culinary team to a classic, hearty breakfast.

There’s a reason we are regarded as one of the best restaurants in New Hampshire. We are committed to upholding culinary excellence, and work hard to ensure each guest has a delightful experience dining at the Wild Rose restaurant.

When you book direct, you'll receive complimentary dinner and breakfast at our North Conway restaurant. A deal with this value simply doesn't exist anywhere else in the valley. Enjoy food that even the locals relish when you stay at Stonehurst Manor.

View Our Menus



Be sure to click "More Menus" on the left side of the page to view ALL Manor menus including Holiday Menus.

Click links below to view menu PDFs.

Breakfast is served daily from 7:30 – 10 am

Library Martini Lounge opens daily at 4:30 pm

Dinner is served nightly from 5:30 - 9:30 pm



HOLIDAY MENU

Valentine's Day - Choose our three-course holiday dinner

or you may order from our regular dinner menu served from 5:30 - 9:30 pm.



Wild Rose

Restaurant Pasta Drying Rack

Restaurant Prime Rib Plate

Restaurant Plate Pizza Beer

Restaurant Wild Rose Seafood

Restaurant Sourdough Bread