Mumbai has been struck with such a heinous event, Amitabh Bachchan said.

Expressing profound grief over the gangrape of a young photojournalist in the city, megastar Amitabh Bachchan today demanded harsh punishment for the perpetrators of the crime.

"It is a shameful act. It is a matter of shame and insult to the city of Mumbai for such a disgraceful thing (gangrape) that has happened here. A photojournalist who was deputed for her work, became a victim. It makes us saddened," he told reporters here at an event.

The 23-year-old photo journalist working with an English magazine, who was on an assignment, was allegedly gangraped by five men in Parel area in central Mumbai last night.

"The authorities concerned need to immediately catch hold of the victims and proper rigorous action needs to be taken at the earliest," Amitabh Bachchan said.

"Just a day prior we have all celebrated rakhi, which bonds us with woman as a sister. This festival also reminds us of protecting any girl... and at this point of time, Mumbai has been struck with such a heinous event," he said.

"We are a country that professes cultural bonding through varied festivals celebrated here. It makes us realise how we need to respect our women," he added.

The megastar was angry with the fake video posted on YouTube that shows him endorsing Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi as the next Prime Minister.

When asked about it, he said the matter has been resolved. "Narendra Modi has assured to take right legal action. The Cyber Crime Department has been entrusted to do their job. I cannot say anything more, unless I am informed who is the actual person who initiated to make this video with my voice-over."

Bachchan was talking at an event where he flagged off 'Kaun Banega Crorepati - Hot Seat Aapke Shehar' van.

The promotional van will travel to 12 cities starting from Surat, Ahmedabad, Jaipur, Ludhiana, Meerut, Lucknow, Varanasi, Patna, Kolkata, Nagpur, Indore and Nashik.

... contd.

Please read our terms of use before posting comments