President Donald Trump has patently appropriated and employed numerous uniquely Nixonian methodologies since being inaugurated, according to a lawsuit filed by the Richard Nixon Foundation.

Trump has “plagiarized and continues to plagiarize from Nixon’s presidency,” the nonprofit foundation responsible for the Nixon Presidential Library and Museum claims in its suit.

“Since taking office, Donald Trump has pirated Richard Milhous Nixon’s protected intellectual property by blatantly attempting to pattern his presidency after that of the 37th president of the United States,” the suit contends.

The foundation — whose board members include Nixon’s two daughters and his brother — also claims it has legal standing to file such a suit since it is charged with preserving Nixon’s legacy, which it alleges is being severely diminished by Trump’s mimicking.

“Trump is obviously copying the Nixon presidential playbook, but without a shred of Nixon’s shrewd intellect.”

“It was one thing when then-candidate Trump parroted President Nixon by calling himself the ‘law and order candidate,’ or when he referred to African-Americans as ‘the blacks,'” said Caleb McCullough, the foundation’s attorney. “But since becoming president, Trump has increasingly said and done things that many people describe as ‘Nixonian,’ to the point he is violating intellectual property laws.”

The lawsuit filed in U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia cites several actions taken and behavioral patterns exhibited by Trump, including “firing the person leading an investigation against the president’s associates and/or the president himself, a total disregard for the rule of law in an attempt to consolidate power, an obsessive need to be loved, an obsessive need to control events and people, blatant animus toward the press, keeping an enemies list, and alluding to the existence of ‘tapes’ of secret White House recordings.”

Additionally, McCullough described Trump welcoming Nixon’s Secretary of State Henry Kissinger to the White House the day he fired FBI Director James Comey as “a gratuitous attempt to don the Nixon mantle.”

“Richard Nixon may have engaged in less-than-honorable activities as president, but at least he never resorted to plagiarizing someone else’s administration. He worked too hard creating his own legacy for some political Johnny-come-lately to steal his work,” McCullough stated.

“Trump is obviously copying the Nixon presidential playbook, but without a shred of Nixon’s shrewd intellect. Nixon lasted six years in office before he resigned because he was brilliant and could keep a secret. As much as Trump likes to complain about leaks, his personal Twitter feed is like a real-time global broadcast of everything he’s thinking. It’s hard to believe he’s lasted as long as he has,” he added.

In addition to a full confession and apology from Trump, the foundation’s suit demands the president immediately cease and desist from any further notably Nixonian activity.

McCullough clarified that the foundation refrained from demanding Trump’s resignation, insisting it would only further overshadow Nixon’s legacy.