Chester County lawmakers called on Gov. Tom Wolf to immediately halt Sunoco's pipeline drilling, citing threats to public and environmental health.

Both State Sen. Andy Dinniman (D-19) and State Sen. John Rafferty (R-44) called the impacts of the pipeline's construction "unacceptable."

"In my district alone, pipeline construction has contaminated almost two dozen wells, disrupted businesses, created significant environmental damage, and resulted in the development of an expanding sinkhole that currently threatens at least two private homes and is within 100 feet of Amtrak's Keystone Line," Dinniman wrote in a December 18 letter to Wolf. "I should point out that all of these incidents have occurred in a single Chester County municipality [West Whiteland Township] as a result of pipeline construction."

The lawmakers voices join a chorus of community groups, homeowners, environmentalists, and others in touting the dangers of the construction. Drinking water has been impacted, and a recent "frack out" ripped open a sinkhole on private property that is adjacent to SEPTA and Amtrak tracks.

Concerns about the safety of Sunoco's operations cross party lines. U.S. Rep. Pat Meehan (R PA-7) also urged Gov. Wolf to address these issues.

"Over the past several months, I have taken numerous meetings with constituents alarmed about the potential safety implications of the construction and operation of the (Mariner East II) pipeline," Meehan said last week. "The nature of the pipeline and its route is such that primary regulatory responsibility for the pipeline rests with the Commonwealth and your administration"

Meehan supports the construction of the pipeline, but noted that "the highest priority in pipeline construction must be the safety of the communities and workers involved."

Mariner East 2, if completed, would run a pipeline carrying volatile natural gas liquids from the massive Marcellus Shale deposit in western Pennsylvania to Marcus Hook, on the Delaware River. It crosses through significant portions of Chester and Delaware counties on its way. The natural gas will then be shipped overseas, largely for use in creating plastics.

Despite the numerous recent Mariner East II accidents, frack outs, and damage to water quality, the Pennsylvania Alliance For Energy describes the existing oversight for pipeline construction as "strict" and urges the state to not halt the process.

"These are major infrastructure projects," Kurt Knaus, a spokesman for the organization, said in a statement. "Critics refuse to accept the long-term economic transformation being powered locally by these projects."



Dinniman and Rafferty have introduced bipartisan legislation that they hope will better equip counties and municipalities to stay safe. Four bills are currently on the floor of the State Senate, including bills 928, 929, 930, and 931. The bills would establish further regulatory oversight, allow municipalities to collect a fee from pipeline operators to pay for emergency clean up and response, and require safety measures like automatic shutoff valves in important areas.

"While Chester County has some of the highest trained and dedicated emergency responders, in the event of a catastrophic release, lives will be lost," Dinniman added. "A natural gas pipeline of this type does not belong in high-consequence communities and other states have implemented commonsense regulations that would prohibit the planned pipeline path. While I have introduced legislation to directly address this issue, action is needed now."

Gov. Wolf has not yet responded to requests to order a halt to Sunoco's drilling.

Drilling had been underway at 55 locations across Pennsylvania, according to an environmental nonprofit, the Clean Air Council. It has not begun at another 168 locations.



AP Photo/Keith Srakocic