Question Answer Episode Marshall hits Lily with what after he proposes? Pilot Thing Ted pretends he is buying at the store? Purple Giraffe Barney's luggage contains? Sweet Taste of Liberty Name one of the things Ted fondly remembers about Natalie. Return of the Shirt Barney says that there are 24 similarities between women and what? Okay Awesome The Slutty Pumpkin's drink? Slutty Pumpkin Unusual creature in Ted and Marshall's apartment? Matchmaker Place Lily's apartment has been turned into? The Duel Sport Marshall's family has created? Belly Full of Turkey Name of the shot that Carl creates? The Pineapple Incident 'Celebrity' that joins the gang on New Years? The Limo First thing that Marshall and Lily agree about for the wedding? The Wedding Fake name Victoria uses? Drumroll, Please 'I want to know you, like _____ _____ _____.' Zip, Zip, Zip What Barney refers to Ted's embarrassing story as? Game Night Where is Marshall's dream internship? Cupcake The song Marshall and Lily sing? Life Among the Gorillas Who do Marshall, Lily, and Barney hang out with? Nothing Good Happens After 2 AM Cutout Ted and Marshall use on Sandy? Mary the Paralegal What Scooter wants to be? Best Prom Ever What Robin shows Ted to cheer him up? Milk What Ted does to stop Robin's camping trip? Come On The pet George Clinton buys Lily? Where Were We? What Ted orders to cure his hangover? The Scorpion and the Toad What Ted and his dad talk about if things get uncomfortable? Brunch Movie Ted is mad that Robin dislikes? Ted Mosby, Architect Concert Marshall and Brad go to? World's Greatest Couple Who plays the Cougar? Aldrin Justice Show the end of the episode reference? Swarley What Barney has to find to win the game? Atlantic City Name of Robin's hit single? Slap Bet What James does that reveals he's in a relationship? Single Stamina Word that Ted calls Lily? How Lily Stole Christmas Where the gang takes Robin's sister? First Time in New York Name of Ted's annoying ex-boss? Columns Who Barney bumps into on the street? Monday Night Football Where is Ted's interview? Lucky Penny Name of Barney's one-man show? Stuff Name of the song that the Fiero plays? Arrivederci, Fiero One of the names that Barney gives the truck in his Top Ten List Moving Day What Lily's grandmother gives her at the bridal shower? Bachelor Party Show Barney appears on? Showdown Phrase Barney discovers has power at a wedding? Something Borrowed Where Robin ends up after the breakup? Something Blue Ted's tramp stamp? Wait For It What Robin keeps finding everywhere? We're Not From Here What Robin tries using to shave her legs? Third Wheel One of Robin's 'buts' from the episode? Little Boys Name of Ted's date? How I Met Everyone Else Celebrity that Marshall and Jeff see in the restaurant? I'm Not That Guy Name of Barney's crazy date? Dowisetrepla One of the gang's annoying habits? Spoiler Alert Name of the song at the end of the episode? Slapsgiving Fashion Show that Ted and Barney go to? The Yips One of the eight steps of the Platinum Rule The Platinum Rule Item that Ted picks up at the club? No Tomorrow Barney's lie that Stella only likes men with ______. Ten Sessions Website that one of the Final Four women has created? The Bracket Nickname Marshall gives his report? The Chain of Screaming Name Marshall gives to phenomenon when people act differently around old friends? Sandcastles in the Sand Person Barney says wrote the Bro Code? The Goat One of two politicians that Randy tries to insert Bro into? Rebound Bro Animals that Lily's paintings have soothing effects on? Everything Must Go Animal Robin's dog turns into after surgery? Miracles Movie Ted makes Stella watch? Do I Know You? Name of the bank that Barney works for? The Best Burger in New York Place where Robin accepts a job at the end of the episode? I Heart NJ One of the reasons for an Intervention in the episode? Intervention One of the two people Stella doesn't want at the wedding? Shelter Island Robin's middle name? Happily Ever After Any of the names Barney gives to the phenomenon of women looking hotter in groups? Not A Father's Day What does Sven's design for the building look like? Woooo! One of the poses Barney and Ted brainstorm? The Naked Man What Marshall uses to carve the turkey 3-5 years in the future? The Fight Canadian bar that Marshall brings Robin to? Little Minnesota Marshall's euphemism for going to the bathroom at work? Benefits Name of Ted and Barney's bar/band? Three Days of Snow The more common name for iliopsoas tendinitis? The Possimpible Name of Barney's fake wife or son? The Stinsons Name of Ted's high school/college ex? Sorry, Bro

Question Answer Episode What Lily plants in Ted's bed to start the breakup? The Front Porch One of the Canadian celebrities the gang guesses? Old King Clancy The movie the Murtaugh List is based from? Murtaugh What Marshall decides to start to make him indispensable at GNB? Mosbius Designs Name of the security guard who helps Barney and Marshall? The Three Days Rule Song that Marshall makes a chart for? Right Place, Right Time The name of Tony's movie? As Fast As She Can What is on the next door building's roof? The Leap Subject of the class that Ted accidentally goes to first? Definitions Name of any of the three doppelgangers in the show? Double Date Any of the three topics that Robin gets distracted by? Robin 101 Name of the song Marshall writes about the date? The Sexless Innkeeper Name of the energy drink Marshall and Ted have? Duel Citizenship Bagpipes is a euphemism for what? Bagpipes Celebrity that Lily invites to break up Barney and Robin? The Rough Patch The play that involves fake websites, an awesome name, and a smartphone? The Playbook Any of the board games that Mickey creates during the episode? Slapsgiving 2: Revenge of the Slap Name of the girl that Ted pursues in the episode? The Window Actor who is Lily's smoking voice? Last Cigarette Ever One of three guest stars in the episode? Girls Versus Suits Robin's phrase that is used as a drinking game? Jenkins Sportscaster who guest stars in the episode? Perfect Week Barney's ringtone in the episode? Rabbit or Duck One of the hot-chick professions in the episode? Hooked Where does Robin go when she's upset? Of Course Herb Barney is allergic to? Say Cheese Marshall claims he's been mugged by what? Zoo or False The guessing game that Marshall plays with the gang? Home Wreckers What Robin leaves in the room when she moves out? Twin Beds The poem that Ted recites twice in Italian? Robots Versus Wrestlers Jed Mosely's catch phrase? The Wedding Bride What Marshall and Lily will do when they find the fifth doppelganger? Doppelgangers Former flame that is at the bar? Big Days Song that Barney, Sam, and James sing? Cleaning House Item that reminds Ted about the GNB building? Unfinished Celebrity that you have to have seen to be a real New Yorker? Subway Wars What Ted says he does for a living to Zoey? Architect of Destruction What Marshall must eat to ensure his child's a boy? Baby Talk Name of Randy's beer Canning Randy Exhibit that young Barney damaged? Natural History Name of Robin's TV show? Glitter Special poultry that Ted has prepared Blitzgiving One of Lily's three rules about going out with another man's wife? The Mermaid Theory Movie that Ted wants to see? False Positive Robin's former co-anchor that reappears? Bad News Movie that Marshall's father tells him to rent? Last Words Celebrity who plays Honey? Oh Honey Movie that is Lily and Marshall's Valentine's tradition? Desperation Day Person who Ted runs into at Hong Kong airport? Garbage Island Guy who Robin begins dating? A Change of Heart Word that Ted can't pronounce? Legendaddy Country where Lily was running off to? The Exploding Meatball Sub Subject of Marshall's rock opera? Hopeless Building that Zoey reveals she grew up in? The Perfect Cocktail App that Robin can't get to download? Landmarks Creature that Lily's vomiting sounds like? Challenge Accepted Theme of Punchy's wedding? The Best Man Game that Pete wants to play with Marshall? The Naked Truth Event where Ted runs into Victoria again? Ducky Tie Class that Ted and Marshall take together? The Stinson Missile Crisis Movie creature that Nora hates? Field Trip Name of Lily and Marshall's doctor? Mystery Vs. History Song Naomi sings to Ted? The Slutty Pumpkin Returns What the sign in front of Maclaren's reads? Disaster Averted Food that Ted and Marshall go to find? Tick, Tick, Tick Name of James' daughter? The Rebound Girl Team that Robin pretends she's sad about not making? Symphony of Illumination Book series that Marshall loved as a kid? Tailgate One of two people who become part of the new group? 46 Minutes Person who is raising bees in Lily and Marshall's basement? The Burning Beekeeper Way that Barney and Ted determine they can enjoy the Drunk Train? The Drunk Train Country where Robin goes in the episode? No Pressure Any of the hobbies Ted uses Robin's room for? Karma Place where Quinn and Barney are going on vacation? The Broath Any of the politicians that the future predicts will be president? Trilogy Time Any of the people that Lily has dream-cheated with? Now We're Even Alcohol that Barney and Marshall take shots of? Good Crazy Middle name that Barney proposes for Lily and Marshall's kid? The Magician's Code - Part 1 Name of Victoria's fiance? The Magician's Code - Part 2