RE: Video Request: Cruz in Knightstown, IN

From:BennettE@dnc.org To: Comm_D@dnc.org Date: 2016-04-26 22:10 Subject: RE: Video Request: Cruz in Knightstown, IN

Cruz: media will try to say this race is over. This campaign is about to move towards more favorable terrain. Outlines areas where Trump agrees with Hillary: -Both Donald Trump and Hillary support the Obamacare individual mandate. -Both Donald Trump and Hillary agree that we should raise taxes. -Both Donald and Hillary agree that undocumented immigrants should become citizens. We’re going to secure the border and end sanctuary cities -Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton support taxpayer funding for Planned Parenthood. As president, I will instruct DOJ to open an investigation into Planned Parenthood -Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton supported Bill Clintons firearm ban. As president, I will defend second amendment rights. -Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton believe we should negotiate with Chuck Schumer and Harry Reid on Supreme Court nominees. I give my word that every justice I appoint will be a principled constitutionalist and I will not compromise your religious liberty -Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton believe that grown men should be allowed to use the bathroom with little girls. Common sense to not allow that happen. Donald and Hillary care more about being PC. -Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton believe that the U.S. should be neutral between Israel and the Palestinians. We should stand unapologetically with Israel. -Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton both agree that we should keep this catastrophic Iranian nuclear deal in place. I will rip it to shreds. -Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton both believe that Hillary Clinton was the best secretary of state. -Both Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton’s campaign is run by lobbyists. They also both supported the stimulus and TARP. Hits Manafort for suggesting that Trump is just playing a role. -Cruz: Donald is telling us that he is lying to us. He says he can be different person tomorrow. I will be the same person yesterday and tomorrow. -Again hits Trump and Clinton campaign for connections to lobbyists. -Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton are both big government liberals. -Eyes of the nation are looking at the state as a crossroads for America. -Protestor comes out. Says if this were a Trump rally, I would encourage people to punch him. But I am encouraging people to treat him with respect. http://abcnews.go.com/Live TED CRUZ: 04/26/2016, 7:00 PM<x-apple-data-detectors://29>: Rally Hoosier Gym 355 N Washington St, Knightstown, IN<x-apple-data-detectors://30>[facebook.com/knightstownnews/posts<http://facebook.com/knightstownnews/posts>]