The Duchess of Cambridge is now an advanced scuba diver after having successfully gained her open water qualification in Mustique.

A Kensington Palace official confirmed that Kate has built on her enjoyment for scuba diving by passing the Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) advanced tests.

Now able to dive to a depth of 98ft, it means she can keep pace with her husband, who is also an experienced diver.

Scroll down for video

The Duchess of Cambridge has become an advanced scuba diver and can now dive to a depth of 98ft

Prince William is the third generation of the monarchy to head the British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC)

His father, Prince Charles (pictured in Majorca in 1986), instilled a love of the water in his son from an early age

William is now the third generation of the monarchy, after his father and grandfather, to head the British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC).

When he took on the role as president of the BSAC , the UK governing body, William said he hoped that little Prince George would follow him by taking up snorkelling and scuba diving.

The Duchess is thought to have gained the qualification from a diving school in Mustique, according to The Telegraph.

A spokesperson for the Duchess told the paper: 'Diving is something the Duchess very much enjoys, and the Duke of Cambridge, who is of course president of the BSAC, has said in the past that he is hopeful his children will become interested in the sport.'

There are five dives - including the must-do deep and underwater navigation dives - which have to be completed successfully in order to gain the advanced qualification.

The deep adventure dive is about the planning of dives, how to deal with the physiological effects and challenges of deeper scuba diving.

Deep sea divers run the risk of contracting decompression sickness. Commonly known as 'the bends', is it a potentially fatal condition caused by nitrogen bubbles in the blood, which are formed as the diver rises to the surface.

The underwater navigation elements aims to fine tune compass navigation skills and helps you better navigate using kick-cycles, visual landmarks and time.

Photography, buoyancy control, fish identification and exploring wrecks are also part of the course.