Get the biggest daily stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

MORONIC displays of sectarian hate returned to Scotland with depressing familiarity during Saturday’s Old Firm derby.

The first Old Firm league clash in four years brought with it shameful behaviour from a minority of bigots on both sides of Glasgow’s footballing divide.

Celtic supporters have been heavily criticised for sick effigies of hanged Rangers fans at Saturday’s match.

Pictures of the sex dolls, with their hands bound behind their backs as if they had been executed, appeared on social media following the game won by the Hoops 5-1.

Meanwhile Rangers fans caused thousands of pounds worth of damage to Parkhead by trashing toilets.

Fixtures and roof panels were ripped out leaving the room looking like it had been hit by a bomb.

During the game a huge banner on display in the Celtic end read: “Know your place hun scum”.

Meanwhile sources described offensive and sectarian chanting from both sets of fans including IRA songs and the notorious Billy Boys.

The pathetic effigies saw blow up dolls - one wearing a Rangers scarf and the other an orange sash - with nooses around their necks dangling from a stand.

They had been hung from a banner reading: “This is it bhoys this is war”.

The crude jibe at opposition fans came on World Suicide Prevention Day, and just days after former Rangers star Kris Boyd bravely spoke out about his brother Scott taking his own life last week.

One furious Rangers fan Allan Kierszten said: “After Kris Boyd losing his brother to suicide I think it is terrible a section of so called Celtic fans did what they did.

“I lost my son to suicide, and I think any human being who has come up with a display like this must be sick in the head.”

Another supporters said on Twitter: “I hope the person has a long think about their actions.”

Elaine Tyrrell said: “Disgusting. Those responsible should be ashamed. Those condoning should be ashamed.”

The effigies appear to have been removed quickly by stewards at the game.

John McMillan, a Rangers fan group spokesman, said: “These are disgusting images that appeared in full view of the Celtic directors box and both police and stewards.

“The effigies have their hands tied behind their backs with black tape and both have ropes round their necks.

“There is also a banner including the term ‘Know your place hun scum’.

“This is an extreme low, and for many Rangers fans today who have witnessed these both at the game and online they are absolutely shocking and disgusting.”

The sickening effigies were also criticised by many Celtic fans who attended the match.

One supporter called Emily Tweeted: “Really quite ashamed to be a Celtic fan after seeing this, bloody sickening.”

Another fan added: “Effigies like these are not welcome IMO! They don’t represent me as a Celtic fan! Disgusting and vile.”

The Celtic Underground Twitter handle said: “I’m sadly never surprised to see that we have scumbags in the Celtic end the same as any other club. The hanging dolls unacceptable.

“Regardless of motivation. Whether or not directed at anyone or anything in particular the lack of sensitivity is a disgrace.”

A Police Scotland spokesman said: “We haven’t received any complaints about this at this time however we will continue to monitor social media and action may be taken if there is evidence of criminality.”

(Image: Daily Record)

After the match police appeared to praise both sets of fans despite the ugly scenes.

Chief Superintendent Brian McInulty said: “I would like to thank all the supporters who came to enjoy the match today in a safe and responsible manner.

“You listened to what we asked and behaved accordingly which has helped our officers ensure the safety of everyone attending the venue.

“All fans came out to enjoy the match and soak up the atmosphere and this is what football should be all about.

“I sincerely hope that the good spirits of both sets of supporters continues throughout the rest of the day and the rest of the evening.”

A Scottish Government spokesperson said: “The Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications Act sends out a clear message that Scotland will not tolerate any form of prejudice, discrimination or hate crime and it gives police and prosecutors an additional tool to tackle this behaviour.”

A Rangers spokesman said: “Hopefully attempts will be made by Police Scotland to find those responsible for this disgraceful and sickening display.

“It was a vile and insensitive stunt which, understandably, has attracted widespread condemnation.

“This was a new low but there were other unacceptable images which were also deeply offensive to Rangers supporters.

“They were clear for everyone, including the authorities, to see.”

Celtic were contacted for comment by The Record, but haven't responded.