174 SHARES Facebook Twitter

The Netflix series that Marvel are producing continue to fire on all cylinders as we finally get a full trailer for the upcoming, hard-hitting Luke Cage. Joining Daredevil and Jessica Jones, Luke Cage brings back Mike Colter as Luke Cage along with Rosario Dawson as nurse Claire Temple, connecting the dots between Daredevil, Jessica Jones and Luke Cage in a shared superhero universe. Get ready to get pumped up because this trailer is smart, funny, perfectly put together, and ready to deliver a knockout punch, just like Luke Cage.

Now there was one jaw dropping, “Oh Hell Yeah” moment in this trailer for the old school Luke Cage fan boys and girls that we’ll discuss after you watch the trailer below.

Here is that trailer moment:

What a terrific nod to the original comics costume.

Another interesting tidbit from the trailer is the book Luke is reading at the end.

Little Green by Walter Mosley, is a hard boiled detective series set in L.A. after World War II. Ezekiel “Easy” Porterhouse Rawlins is a black detective working the hard side of L.A. and Cage could be looking for tips on how to manage himself in similar situations.

We last saw Easy in 2007’s Blonde Faith, fighting for his life after his car plunges over a cliff. True to form, the tough WWII veteran survives, and soon his murderous sidekick Mouse has him back cruising the mean streets of L.A., in all their psychedelic 1967 glory, to look for a young black man, Evander “Little Green” Noon, who disappeared during an acid trip. Fueled by an elixir called Gator’s Blood, brewed by the conjure woman Mama Jo, Easy experiences a physical, spiritual, and emotional resurrection, but peace and love soon give way to murder and mayhem. Written with Mosley’s signature grit and panache, this engrossing and atmospheric mystery is not only a trip back in time, it is also a tough-minded exploration of good and evil, and of the power of guilt and redemption. Once again, Easy asserts his reign over the City of (Fallen) Angels.

Marvel and Netflix are really knocking it out of the park with these new series. If only ABC could get on board and make Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. half as good as Daredevil, Jessica Jones, and now Luke Cage, we’d have some serious television to watch. Gotta tell you, we’d put any of the Netflix series up against any Marvel movie for entertainment purposes and be hard pressed to not have these Netflix series in the top five.

Seriously, if the network is gonna m0ve Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. to the 10PM time slot, let’s amp up the adult nature of the show and “Netflix-up” the ABC series.

Luke Cage hits Netflix September 30th, so gather your favorite snacks and get ready for a weekend of Luke Cage Binge Watching.

Via: Netflix

Related

174 SHARES Facebook Twitter

Category: TV