Hellboy's been in a rough patch lately. It was only in last year's miniseries The Fury that one of Big Red's supernatural nemeses tore out his heart and killed him. Now that Hellboy's dead, his final destination should be pretty obvious.

Indeed, courtesy of Mike Mignola and Dark Horse Comics, here's an exclusive first look at Hellboy in Hell. And you thought your family reunions were screwed up.

Advertisement

Here's a sneak peek at a double-sided giveaway poster Dark Horse will be handing out at Seattle's Emerald City Comic Con and Salt Lake City's World Horror Con this weekend. One side of this poster features the first image from Hellboy in Hell, an upcoming miniseries both written and illustrated by Mike Mignola.

This comic's slated to come out later in 2012. We don't have an issue synopsis yet, but here's how Mike described the title to io9 in December, and here's his giant-insect-filled vision of Hell he gave to L.A. Weekly last year:

Advertisement

I love drawing old architecture with lots of shadows and walls and lots of creaky angles. It's not going to be big pots of fire because that's pretty boring [...] There's a lot of stuff that's halfway between an ant and a praying mantis and there are a lot of these little sea creatures that look kind of like, my daughter said they were krill, like little tiny shrimp or something [...] Hellboy is in Hell. He goes home, he finds out if he has brothers and sisters, he goes to the house where he was born, all that kind of stuff [...] Then it just meanders wherever I want it to go.

Advertisement

And here's the other side of the poster, which features Duncan Fegredo's cover art for B.P.R.D. Hell on Earth: The Devil's Engine #1, which comes out May 16. Here's the rundown on that.

B.P.R.D. Hell on Earth: The Devil's Engine #1

Writer: Mike Mignola, John Arcudi

Artist: Tyler Crook

Colorist: Dave Stewart

Cover Artist: Duncan Fegredo Caught between bat-faced monsters, a devastating earthquake, and the mad science experiments of Zinco, Devon and Fenix form an uneasy alliance in order to get to safety!

Advertisement

You can find this poster, along with Dark Horse's creative teams, at the World Horror Con and Emerald City Comic Con this weekend. Dark Horse editor Scott Allie and Mike Mignola will be at the former, and Brian Wood, Ethan Nicolle, Paul Tobin, Mike Oeming, and other creators will be attending the latter.