A month or so ago, Modi government decided to impose a one day blackout on NDTV India for airing content regarding Pathankot strike that could have aided the terrorists and imperiled the lives of our security men and their families. The decision was recommended by an inter-ministerial committee after carefully analyzing the content aired by NDTV India.

This was not the first time that a channel was taken off air as a penalty for airing content which broadly speaking was ‘objectionable’. However, no sooner was this decision announced that the opposition, media persons, liberals of all shades and colours etc. loudly castigated the government for its decision. The decision was painted as an attack on Media’s freedom. The errant TV channel filed a case before Supreme Court. Amidst all the hullabaloo, the government backtracked and the ban was withdrawn. Critics wasted no point in reminding the public that here was a despotic government, hell bent on imposing dictatorship. One particularly loud mouthed and obnoxious political opponent wasted no time describing the government’s decision as ‘Emergency-like attitude’. The same loud mouthed, obnoxious opponent has now filed a non-bailable FIR against Zee News and its reporter Sudhir Chaudhary for daring to openly air the communal rampage which took place in her backyard.

.@MamataOfficial Govt files FIR against me& @ZeeNews reporter for covering #DhulagarhRiots with Non Bailable sections.FIR for showing truth? — Sudhir Chaudhary (@sudhirchaudhary) December 27, 2016

A few days ago, Dhulagarh, in Howrah district of West Bengal, located some 30 odd Kilometres from the state’s capital was rocked by communal violence. While Hindus of the town were busy with Margashirsha Poornima festivities on 13th December, the Muslims formed a procession, blaring loud music, ostensibly claiming to celebrate Milad-un-Nabi, which actually fell the day before and was a public holiday. A simple request by Hindus to lower the volume of loudspeakers, provoked the Muslims into a frenzy of riot and arson. Hindu homes and shops were set ablaze and scores of Hindus were forced to flee. Locals reported that the Muslims who rioted at Dhulagarh were not locals but had come from outside specifically with the purpose of ousting Hindus. As per news reports, the police party sent to put an end to the riot was stopped by the rioters and bombs were hurled at it.

As was expected, not a single major news channel reported the riots at Dhulagarh, with the exception of Zee News. In fact, Senior Journalists such as Rajdeep Sardesai, actually claimed that the riots were rumours.

Mamata Banerjee and her government maintained studied silence on this issue. Those closely observing West Bengal point out the regularity with which riots have been taking place in the state, with the government turning a blind eye is reminiscent of the riots that preceded the partition of Bengal. One would have hoped that Mamata Banerjee would show the same alacrity in coming to the aid of besieged Hindus of her state as she did in cursing Modi on the demonetization issue, but alas, Didi has no time to help the Hindus. It is the Muslim votebank in West Bengal that must be protected and nurtured.

Be that as it may, it now emerges that an FIR has been filed against Zee News and its reporter, Sudhir Choudhary for airing content on Dhulagarh riots.

This is deeply disturbing. The act is in complete contravention of the principle of Media freedom. If FIRs can be filed against journalists for airing content, which some secular parties may deem objectionable, it will be the end of democracy as we know it. Mamata Banerjee is effectively silencing the voice of Media, which so far has been free to air stories lauding her or criticizing her. The message is clear. Criticize Mamata Banerjee and she will ensure that wrath of the government will fall upon you. It is one thing to demand that Media should be regulated, either self-regulation or by agreed guidelines, but it is completely different for elected governments to threaten Media persons from airing content at the risk of prosecution.

Mamata Banerjee, who has so often claimed to be the guardian of democracy in India, should know this better. Instead of harassing media channels for highlighting the inadequacy of her administration, she should try and improve law and order situation in her state.

Also, while it is pointless to expect this, one would hope that our liberals, democrats, intellectuals etc. would fill the streets to challenge Mamata Banerjee’s draconian decision. Unfortunately, too many of them would have been eating out of Mamata Banerjee’s hands for their conscience to be stirred on this occasion.