What the developers have to say:

Why Early Access?

Approximately how long will this game be in Early Access?

How is the full version planned to differ from the Early Access version?

Three more chapters to support the story line.



More enemies.



More henchmen.



More ability types.



More midimension types.



More flaw strategies.



More fortresses.



More dimensional influences - fragments of other times and places.



More weapons and abilities.

What is the current state of the Early Access version?

Endless (generated) midimensions that scale in challenge with player advancement. No two midimensions are the same. Players can continue to play against increasing challenge. However, as of now, the uniqueness of those dynamic challenges begins to top off around level 50.



4 chapters with "end" fortresses.



Over 30 artifacts.



Over 80 different abilities to acquire and customize weapons with.



Four midimension types and three midimension strategies.

Will the game be priced differently during and after Early Access?

How are you planning on involving the Community in your development process?

“Warpin: Creation (VR) was play tested in private groups familiar with the landscape of VR games and received strongly positive responses in comparison to other early VR games on Steam.Early Access is being provided as a means to get the game into the hands of the community while I finish implementing the story line. Warpin has been built with the ability to add additional strategies and mechanics. So, I'll be listening closely for community ideas and incorporating those while finishing up the story details.Please remember that occasional bugs are to be expected, but so are new features and content additions. Stay tuned...”“The game is planned to be complete in the next 3 months based on feedback, ideas, and requests from the community. I'm also very open to adding additional more features after that release as DLC.”“The full version will contain more depth and implementation of the story line. Warpin: Creation (VR) is based on the first chapter "Creation" of my unpublished novel "Warpin" and I'll be making sure the game conveys that story line and lore as much as possible.In addition, these features are already planned to enhance the existing experience.And other unplanned features, depending on user feedback.”“Warpin: Creation (VR) is playable and currently features:“The price is not expected to change when Warpin: Creation (VR) leaves early access.”“Player feedback is important to me and the best way to get in touch is to post right here on the Steam Discussions page. I'll be reading every post, fixing reported bugs, and taking everyone's suggestions into consideration. Bugs will be tackled first, ideas second. I'll be on the look out for player ideas related to midimension types and strategies, as they have a dramatic impact on the long-term playability. The story and lore of the game are locked down, but the game play strategies are wide open to be expanded with the best community ideas between now and RC.”