Elevated levels of nitrates have been found in water in select areas of Franklin County.

The Columbus Division of Water says areas impacted by the nitrate advisory include portions of west, central, and southwest Columbus, as well as Grandview Heights, Grove City, Hilliard, Lincoln Village, Marble Cliff, Upper Arlington, Urbancrest, and Valleyview.

The city is warning residents that infants below the age of six months who drink water containing nitrates in excess of the maximum contaminant level could become seriously ill and, if untreated, may die. Residents who live in the designated service area and have an infant below the age of six months are advised to purchase bottled water to use in baby formula.

The city also alerts residents not to boil tap water, as it could increase nitrate levels.

However, healthy adults and older children can consume higher levels of nitrate because they have fully developed digestive systems. It is also safe for pets.

On Monday, the nitrate level in tap water tested at the Dublin Road plant registered 10.8 parts per million, exceeding the maximum contaminant level, which is 10 ppm. On Tuesday, the levels increased tp 11.7 ppm.

The Ohio Department of Health will make bottled water available to pregnant women and infants below 6 months of age who reside in the impacted areas (including WIC clients) and who are unable to otherwise obtain water on their own. Columbus Public Health will begin water distribution this evening from 4:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. in the front loop at 240 Parsons Avenue, and Franklin County Public Health will begin water distribution at Westland Mall, in front of the former Macy’s, at 4141 West Broad Street. Water distribution will continue at both locations from 11:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m., and 4:00 to 6:00 p.m. daily as long as the advisory is

active.

For those who are unable to drive and pick up water. City officials ask that you arrange for family or friends to pick up water for them.

Columbus Public Health – 645-7417

Columbus Public Utilities (Division of Water) – 645-8276