Luli Faver says the Divine Truth has helped her deal with ’emotional stuff’ (Picture: Sky News)

A British scientist is one of the growing number of followers of an Australian man who claims to be Jesus Christ.

Louise ‘Luli’ Faver, 39, has given up her career to be near to Alan John Miller who runs a religious movement known as the Divine Truth.

The former IT specialist, who prefers to be known as AJ, runs what is seen by many as cult from his home near the small town of Kingaroy in the state of Queensland.

Not only does he claim to be Jesus but he also maintains his partner, Mary Luck, is Mary Magdalene, who was present at the crucifixion, the Bible says.

According to the Divine Truth website Ms Faver, a former neuroscientist, now helps Divine Truth with admin tasks.

She told Sky News she believes Mr Miller has helped her become happier and more fulfilled in life.

Advertisement

Advertisement

‘It’s just nice to instead of being surrounded by people who think you are nuts, to be surrounded by people who understand what you are going through and the difficulties of trying to deal with all the emotional stuff,’ she said.

Mr Miller himself said: ‘I have very clear memories of the crucifixion, but it wasn’t as harrowing for me as it was for others like Mary who was present.

‘Clear memories of crucifixion’ – Jesus cult leader AJ Miller (Picture: Sky News)

‘When you are one with God you are not in a state of fear, and you have quite good control over your body’s sensations and the level of pain that you absorb from your body.’

Mr Miller spreads his message through DVDs and the internet and the cult has begun to attract followers from other parts of the world.

George Hamel moved from California, leaving behind his wife and businesses so he can be closer to Mr Miller.

He is adamant Mr Miller is Jesus Christ and insists there’s nothing sinister about him.

‘It’s natural that people form fears when they don’t know about something,’ he said.

Anyone who has a chance to look into it aren’t going to find anything too upsetting.’

But cult expert Rev David Millikan, who has met AJ Miller, has concerns about his movement.

He said: ‘The danger is you’ll be drawn closer and closer into his web to a point that you lose access to your social life, you spend all your money, you’ll have the curses of all your family ringing in your ears and you may well lose your relationship.’