Contents show]

Alteration Edit

Fundamental Edit

Absorbing Grasp : The caster absorbs <10> points of health from the touched target. Base Cost: 50

: The caster absorbs points of health from the touched target. Light (Rank I) : The caster creates a bright hovering light that lasts for <300> seconds. Base Cost: 150

: The caster creates a bright hovering light that lasts for seconds. Mage Armor (Rank I): Improves the caster's armor rating by <20> points for <60> seconds. Base Cost: 100

Advanced (25) Edit

Animate Lockpick : The caster infuses simple inanimate lockpicks with life, making them able to pick locks almost by themselves. However, the spell requires a piece of quicksilver ore to work properly. Base Cost: 300

: The caster infuses simple inanimate lockpicks with life, making them able to pick locks almost by themselves. However, the spell requires a piece of quicksilver ore to work properly. Featherfalling : The caster's feet become surrounded by a telekinetic field that negates all falling damage for <60> seconds. Base Cost: 150

: The caster's feet become surrounded by a telekinetic field that negates all falling damage for seconds. Light (Rank II) : The caster creates a ball of bright light that lasts <60> seconds and sticks where it strikes. Base Cost: 84

: The caster creates a ball of bright light that lasts seconds and sticks where it strikes. Mage Armor (Rank II) : Improves the caster's armor rating by <30> points for <60> seconds. Base Cost: 150

: Improves the caster's armor rating by points for seconds. Transmute: Muscles (Rank I): The caster's raw strength and body tissue becomes magically reinforced. Therefore, unarmed damage, health and carrying capacity are increased by <25> points for <40> seconds. Base Cost: 250

Superior (50) Edit

Absorb Health : The caster absorbs <10> points of health per second from the target. Base Cost: 100

: The caster absorbs points of health per second from the target. Absorb Stamina : The caster absorbs <10> points of stamina per second from the target. Base Cost: 100

: The caster absorbs points of stamina per second from the target. Detect Life : The caster detects all nearby living beings and can sense them even through walls. Base Cost: 50

: The caster detects all nearby living beings and can sense them even through walls. Mage Armor (Rank III) : Improves the caster's armor rating by <40> points for <60> seconds. Base Cost: 200

: Improves the caster's armor rating by points for seconds. Mage Shield (Rank I) : Improves the target's armor rating by <80> points for <60> seconds. Base Cost: 200

: Improves the target's armor rating by points for seconds. Telekinetic Hand : The caster grabs the target item from afar. It then can be either taken or thrown. Base Cost: 170

: The caster grabs the target item from afar. It then can be either taken or thrown. Transmute: Water : The caster is able to transmute small amounts of water into air, allowing him to breath underwater for <300> seconds. Also, the caster's ability to swim becomes improved greatly, negating any stamina penalties while swimming, even when wearing armor. Base Cost: 222

: The caster is able to transmute small amounts of water into air, allowing him to breath underwater for seconds. Also, the caster's ability to swim becomes improved greatly, negating any stamina penalties while swimming, even when wearing armor. Transmute: Minerals : Transmutes one piece of unrefined Iron ore to Silver, or Silver ore to Gold if the caster is carrying any. Base Cost: 100

: Transmutes one piece of unrefined Iron ore to Silver, or Silver ore to Gold if the caster is carrying any. Transmute: Muscles (Rank II): The touched target's raw strength and body tissue becomes magically reinforced. Therefore, unarmed damage, health and carrying capacity are increased by <25> points for <45> seconds. Base Cost: 300

Sophisticated (75) Edit

Absorb Magicka : The caster absorbs <10> points of magicka per second from the target. Base Cost: 120

: The caster absorbs points of magicka per second from the target. Arcane Mending : The caster mends the target automaton or atronach telekinetically, restorating <75> points of health. Base Cost: 150

: The caster mends the target automaton or atronach telekinetically, restorating points of health. Detect Death : The caster detects all nearby dead and can sense them even through walls. Base Cost: 75

: The caster detects all nearby dead and can sense them even through walls. Mage Armor (Rank IV) : Improves the caster's armor rating by <50> points for <60> seconds. Base Cost: 250

: Improves the caster's armor rating by points for seconds. Mage Shield (Rank II) : Improves the target's armor rating by <120> points for <60> seconds. Base Cost: 300

: Improves the target's armor rating by points for seconds. Paralyze (Rank I) : The caster tries to telekinetically imprison the target for <1> seconds. Base Cost: 200

: The caster tries to telekinetically imprison the target for seconds. Polymorph : The caster attempts to turn the target into a harmless animal for <30> seconds. Although potent, the spell is rumored to be very unstable, and various side-effects have been reknown to be the consequence of its casting... Base Cost: 600

: The caster attempts to turn the target into a harmless animal for seconds. Although potent, the spell is rumored to be very unstable, and various side-effects have been reknown to be the consequence of its casting... Telekinetic Disarray : The caster magically removes all worn equipment from the target, though one should beware. Unpredictable side-effects like cloth-phobia might occur. Base Cost: 500

: The caster magically removes all worn equipment from the target, though one should beware. Unpredictable side-effects like cloth-phobia might occur. Telekinetic Nova: The caster evokes an explosion of telekinetic forces, maiming all nearby targets and sending them flying through the air. Base Cost: 500

Master (100) Edit

Absorb Essence : The caster absorbs <10> points of health, magicka and stamina per second from the target. Base Cost: 200

: The caster absorbs points of health, magicka and stamina per second from the target. Animate Lock : The caster can infuse almost any lock with magic energies, causing it to unlock itself on his behalf. Base Cost: 750

: The caster can infuse almost any lock with magic energies, causing it to unlock itself on his behalf. Etherealness : The target's body is dematerialized, becoming practically invulnerable for as long as the caster doesn't interact with the environment. Base Cost: 0

: The target's body is dematerialized, becoming practically invulnerable for as long as the caster doesn't interact with the environment. Lighting Speed : The caster moves with meteoric speed, making everything slow down almost to motionlessness for <3> seconds. Base Cost: 1200

: The caster moves with meteoric speed, making everything slow down almost to motionlessness for seconds. Mage Armor (Rank V) : The caster creates an almost unpenetrable force field that negates nearly all physical damage taken for <7> seconds. Base Cost: 1000

: The caster creates an almost unpenetrable force field that negates nearly all physical damage taken for seconds. Mage Shield (Rank III) : The caster surrounds the target with an almost unpenetrable force field that negates nearly all physical damage for <4> seconds. Base Cost: 1000

: The caster surrounds the target with an almost unpenetrable force field that negates nearly all physical damage for seconds. Paralyze (Rank II) : The caster tries to paralyze all nearby beings for <1> seconds. Base Cost: 937

: The caster tries to paralyze all nearby beings for <1> seconds. Telekinetic Blast : The caster unleashes a wave of telekinetic force that will maim every single bone of the targets while sending them flying through the air. Base Cost: 1000

: The caster unleashes a wave of telekinetic force that will maim every single bone of the targets while sending them flying through the air. Telekinetic Execution : The caster attempts to break every single bone of the target while casting it miles into the air, ensuring that it's maimed for good. Base Cost: 1600

: The caster attempts to break every single bone of the target while casting it miles into the air, ensuring that it's maimed for good. Telekinetic Grab : The caster grabs the target from afar. It then can be either taken or thrown. Base Cost: 500

: The caster grabs the target from afar. It then can be either taken or thrown. Transcendance (Rank I) : The caster's body is dematerialized, becoming practically invulnerable for as long as the caster doesn't interact with the environment. Base Cost: 1200

: The caster's body is dematerialized, becoming practically invulnerable for as long as the caster doesn't interact with the environment. Transcendance (Rank II) : The target's body is dematerialized, becoming practically invulnerable for as long as the caster doesn't interact with the environment. Base Cost: 1200

: The target's body is dematerialized, becoming practically invulnerable for as long as the caster doesn't interact with the environment. Transmute: Corpus: The caster tries to transmute the target into slimy ectoplasm, thereby killing it instantly and generating useful alchemy ingredients. Base Cost: 1000

Conjuration Edit

Fundamental Edit

Bound Sword

Conjure Familiar

Raise Zombie

Raise Dead (Rank I)

Summon Ghostly Wolf

Summon Skeletal Soldier

Summon Swarm (Rank I)

Advanced (25) Edit

Bound Axe

Conjure Flaming Familiar

Necromantic Empowerment (Rank I)

Raise Dead (Rank II)

Soulcairn Summoning (Rank I)

Soul Trap (Rank I)

Summon Ghostly Mudcrab

Summon Ghostly Hound

Summon Skeletal Archer

Summon Skeletal Hero

Summon Skeletal Warlock

Summon Swarm (Rank II)

Superior (50) Edit

Banish Deadra (Rank I)

Conjure Flame Atronach

Necromantic Empowerment (Rank II)

Raise Dead (Rank III)

Soulcairn Summoning (Rank II)

Soul Trap (Rank II)

Spectral Arrow

Summon Ghostly Archer

Summon Ghostly Bear

Summon Ghostly Berserker

Summon Ghostly Troll

Summon Ghostly Warrior

Teleport (Rank I): First cast marks an area. Second cast teleports you back to that mark, destroying it. Don't teleport out of Sovngarde (or anywhere else you don't have a way of getting back to).

Sophisticated (75) Edit

Banish Daedra (Rank II)

Bound Bow

Conjure Dragon Priest

Conjure Frost Atronach

Conjure Storm Atronach

Command Daedra

Expel Daedra

Raise Dead (Rank IV)

Soulcairn Summoning (Rank III)

Summon Ghostly Sabrecat

Summon Ghostly Warlock

Summon Ghostly Wraith

Teleport Vitals: Deals 5 damage to living enemies every second because you teleported something important outside of their bodies.

Master (100) Edit

Conjure Dremora Lord

Conjure Flame Thrall

Conjure Frost Thrall

Conjure Storm Thrall

Conjure Dremora Archer

Conjure Dremora Archmage

Conjure Invisible Stalker

Raise Dead (Rank V)

Summon Ghostly Dragonpriest

Summon Ghostly Lich

Summon Ghostly Steed: Summons a very fast horse. While riding, you can't be hurt.

Summon Ghostly Werewolf

Teleport (Rank II): Teleports you to a place you can see.

Destruction Edit

All spells stats are with the appropriate perk (fundamental destruction, advanced destruction, etc.), and with destruction at 100. No other relevant perks are included, unless otherwise noted. Costs are not certain; Archmage robes may have been equipped during testing.

Fundamental Edit

Advanced (25) Edit

Superior (50) Edit

Fireball: Deals 160 points of damage to an area. Does not hurt the caster at point-blank range. Will hurt followers. Costs 60 magicka.

Sophisticated (75) Edit

Firebolt: Deals 325 points of damage. Costs 135 magicka.

Master (100) Edit

Arcane Volley: Deals lots of damage every second (not sure how much). Pierces magical resistances (not sure which ones). Costs 78 magicka/second.

Ice Storm: Makes a blizzard which does 150 cold to everything inside it every second. Lasts 60 seconds. Costs 427 magicka.

Lightning Cascade: Outside only; still sometimes does not work. Lightning bolts strike the target from above over and over. A roof will interfere. Costs 579 magicka.

Lightning Vortex: Almost certainly bugged. Does 450 lightning damage per second for 38 magicka/second. Probably meant to be 380 magicka/second.

Venomous Shock: 120 poison damage per second for 2 seconds. 30 poison damage for 10 seconds. 231 magicka/second.



Illusion Edit

Fundamental Edit

Clairvoyance - Still testing effects

Still testing effects Frightening Orb - Still testing effects

Still testing effects Charming Touch - The target will stop hostilities towards caster for 42 seconds. Exhausts 77 Magicka.

The target will stop hostilities towards caster for 42 seconds. Lionheart - The target will not flee battle, gains 26 stamina, and magicka and regenerates these attributes 52% faster for 42 seconds. Exhausts 77 Magicka

The target will not flee battle, gains 26 stamina, and magicka and regenerates these attributes 52% faster for 42 seconds. Dark Vision - Still testing effects

Advanced (25) Edit

Superior (50) Edit

Sophisticated (75) Edit

Master (100) Edit

Restoration Edit

Fundamental Edit

Arcane Ward (Rank I): The caster creates a protective shield that negates a moderate amount of physical damage and negates up to <20> points of spell damage. Base Cost: 50

The caster creates a protective shield that negates a moderate amount of physical damage and negates up to points of spell damage. Healing Aura (Rank I): The caster becomes surrounded by healing energy that restores health slowly but steadily for a long time. Base Cost: 175

Advanced (25) Edit

Arcane Ward (Rank II) : The caster creates a protective shield that negates a great amount of physical damage and negates up to < 40> points of spell damage. Base Cost: 70

: The caster creates a protective shield that negates a great amount of physical damage and negates up to < points of spell damage. Dispel Soul Gems : The caster sets free all souls currently captured in carried soul gems. Base Cost 150

: The caster sets free all souls currently captured in carried soul gems. Heal Self (Rank I) : Heals the caster <10> points per second. Base Cost: 40

Heal Self (Rank II) : Heals the caster by < 20> points. The spell does not affect undead, atronachs and automatons. Base Cost: 100

: Heals the caster by < points. The spell does not affect undead, atronachs and automatons. Healing Hands (Rank I) : Heals the target by < 5> points per second, but not the undead, atronachs or constructs. Base Cost: 25

: Heals the target by < points per second, but not the undead, atronachs or constructs. Turn Undead (Rank I) : The caster causes Undead up to level < 6> to flee for <30> seconds. Base Cost: 84

: The caster causes Undead up to level < to flee for seconds. Protection From Poison (Rank I) : The caster's body becomes protected by positive energies that weaken the effects of poison by <20> percent for one hour. Base Cost: 150

: The caster's body becomes protected by positive energies that weaken the effects of poison by percent for one hour. Sunfire : The caster evokes a ball of searing sunlight that deals <50> points of sun damage to any undead. Base Cost: 75

: The caster evokes a ball of searing sunlight that deals points of sun damage to any undead. Terminate Undead (Rank I): The caster deals <50> damage to the target Undead. Base Cost: 200

Superior (50) Edit

Arcane Disjunction (Rank I) : The caster evokes a mystic energy that decreases the target's magic resistance by <5>% for <7> seconds. Base Cost: 400

: The caster evokes a mystic energy that decreases the target's magic resistance by for seconds. Arcane Ward (Rank III): The caster creates a protective shield that negates a great amount of physical damage and negates up to <60> points of spell damage and has a chance to reflect a fraction of

absorbed spells. Also renders the caster immune to most paralyzing effects. Base Cost: 100

Dispel (Rank I) : All magical effects and poisons are removed from the caster. Base Cost: 480

: All magical effects and poisons are removed from the caster. Heal Self (Rank III) : Heals the caster by <40> points. The spell does not affect undead, atronachs and automatons. Base Cost: 150

Heals the caster by points. The spell does not affect undead, atronachs and automatons. Healing Aura (Rank II): The touched target becomes surrounded by healing energy that restores health slowly but steadily for a long time. Base Cost: 200

Healing Hands (Rank II) : Heals the target by < 30> points, but not undead, atronachs or machines. Base Cost: 80

: Heals the target by < points, but not undead, atronachs or machines. Healing Ray : The caster evokes a ray of healing energy, restoring <60> health to the target each second. Base Cost: 125

: The caster evokes a ray of healing energy, restoring health to the target each second. Protection From Poison (Rank II): The touched target's body becomes protected by positive energies that weaken the effects of poison by <20> percent for one hour. Base Cost: 200

Repel Undead (Rank I) : The caster causes Undead up to level <8> to flee for <30> seconds. Base Cost: 115

: The caster causes Undead up to level to flee for seconds. Sunburst: The caster evokes a searing explosion of sunlight that deals <100> points of sun damage any hit undead. Base Cost: 325

The caster evokes a searing explosion of sunlight that deals points of sun damage any hit undead. Terminate Undead (Rank II) : The caster deals <100> damage to all undead beings the evoked spell hits. Base Cost: 400

: The caster deals damage to all undead beings the evoked spell hits. Turn Undead (Rank II): The caster causes Undead up to level <13> to flee for <30> seconds. Base Cost: 168

Sophisticated (75) Edit

Arcane Disjunction (Rank II) : The caster evokes a mystic energy that decreases the target's magic resistance by <15>% for as long as the spell is channeled. Base Cost: 400

: The caster evokes a mystic energy that decreases the target's magic resistance by for as long as the spell is channeled. Arcane Ward (Rank IV): The caster creates a protective shield that negates a great amount of physical damage and negates up to <80> points of spell damage and always reflects a fraction of absorbed spells. It also renders the caster immune to most paralyzing and

life-draining effects. Base Cost: 150

Circle of protection : Undead up to level < 20> entering the circle will flee. Base Cost: 171

: Undead up to level < entering the circle will flee. Healing Aura (Rank III): The caster becomes surrounded by powerful healing energy that restores health passively for a long time. The spell also renders the caster immune to almost all magical drain and absorb effects. Base Cost: 400

Healing Aura (Rank IV): The touched target becomes surrounded by powerful healing energy that restores health passively for a long time. The spell also renders the target immune to almost all magical drain and absorb effects. Base Cost: 400

Healing Hands (Rank III) : Heals the target by < 50> points per second, but not the undead, atronachs or constructs. Also cures almost all diseases the caster is suffering from. Base Cost: 250

: Heals the target by < points per second, but not the undead, atronachs or constructs. Also cures almost all diseases the caster is suffering from. Repel Undead (Rank II) : The caster causes Undead up to level < 16> to flee for <30> seconds. Base Cost: 353

: The caster causes Undead up to level < to flee for seconds. Turn Undead (Rank III): The caster causes Undead up to level <21> to flee for <30> seconds. Base Cost: 266

Master (100) Edit