Gleb "Funn1k" Lipatnikov has left Team Empire to join Team Spirit, the organization announced Tuesday.

Funn1k achieved a quite a bit as part of Empire, netting second place at DreamLeague Season 4 and winning Game Show Global eSports Cup Season 1. However the team missed out on a Shanghai Major berth after being swept by Team Spirit in the qualifier’s Loser’s Finals.

Funn1k's departure from Team Empire does not come as too big of a surprise, as it was announced that he would not be competing with the team at the upcoming Dota PIt League Season 4 LAN Finals. Funn1k was still part of Empire at the time of the announcement, replaced by Andrey "Ghostik" Kadyk, but it appears that the players has decided to leave and has joined Team Spirit with former teammate Artur "Goblak" Kostenko.

Artur "Goblak" Kostenko (right) and Bogdan "Iceberg" Vasilenko during the SL i-League LAN Finals in Minsk, Belarus

Funn1k and Goblak have been off-and-on teammates during their times on Empire and Natus Vincere, most notably Empire's late 2012 era when the team was most dominant. In a two-month time-frame, they were grand finalists at five tournaments, winning three. Spirit are still looking for their fifth member, but Ilya "Illidan" Pivcaev will be standing in.

Team Spirit will be competing in the European Qualifier for EPICENTER: Moscow, as well as the fifth iteration of DreamLeague. Their first opponent in the EPICENTER qualifier is London Conspiracy, taking place on March 26, while DreamLeague 5 is scheduled to kick off on March 21, but no match details have been released.

Team Empire’s roster for the Dota PIt League Season 4 LAN Finals looks as follows:

Maxim " yoky- " Kim

" Kim Rostislav " fn " Lozovoi

" Lozovoi Andrey " Ghostik " Kadyk

" Kadyk Ilya " ALOHADANCE " Korobkin

" Korobkin Alexander "NoFear" Churochkin

And Team Spirit’s roster now looks as follows:

Bogdan " Iceberg " Vasilenko

" Vasilenko Gleb " Funn1k " Lipatnikov

" Lipatnikov Artur " Goblak " Kostenko

" Kostenko Andrey "ALWAYSWANNAFLY" Bondarenko