As the coaching carousel goes into overdrive this week, a handful of school’s made news with coaching hires. We take a look at each hire and rank them from best to worst.

1. MARK RICHT, MIAMI

Pros: An offensive-minded coach who’s spent the past 15 seasons at Georgia, Richt brings a wealth of coaching knowledge and a big name to a program desperate to return to relevance on the national landscape. He knows the passion and tradition associated with Miami and should ease the minds of former ‘Canes players who grew weary of the struggles of the program under Al Golden.

Cons: One of the reason’s Richt isn’t still at Georgia is because of a fickle fan base that was unsatisfied the Bulldogs weren’t winning the big games. This year’s team was 0-2 versus teams ranked in the top 25 and 5-7 over the past three seasons.

The Buzz: Anytime you land someone who’s won close to 74 percent of their games including two conference championships and six division titles, that’s a pretty good hire. You somehow knew Richt wasn’t going to be out of work very long and he wasn’t. In the ACC, Richt will have plenty of opportunities to win the Coastal Division and compete for titles.

2. JUSTIN FUENTE, VIRGINIA TECH

Pros: There was no hotter coaching candidate this season than Fuente, who in a short amount of time turned around a Memphis program from a conference bottom-feeder to a ranked power. In four seasons, the Tigers have gone 26-23 under Fuente including 10-wins in 2014 and a top 15 ranking in 2015.

Cons: It’s not going to be easy to take over for a legendary coach like Frank Beamer. For 29 seasons, Beamer has been a fixture with the Hokies, transforming the program into a national power. Now, it’s Fuente’s turn. His biggest challenge will be recruiting a state and a conference where he has no familiarity.

The Buzz: Fuente’s expertise is developing quarterbacks. Something he did well at TCU with Andy Dalton and with Paxton Lynch at Memphis. He’ll need to do the same sort of thing in Blacksburg next season. Virginia Tech finished ranked ninth in the ACC in passing offense and could use a boost offensively.

3. KIRBY SMART, GEORGIA

Pros: Smart is one of the best assistant coaches in the country, having won the Broyles Award for top assistant in 2009. His defenses at Alabama have been some of the best in nation and he’s sent a bevy of talent to the NFL over the years. He’s also an incredible recruiter, bringing in players like Reuben Foster, Dee Milliner and Marlon Humphrey.

Cons: Smart has never been a head coach and now takes over an SEC program that just fired a head coach that won 74 percent of his games. How patient will the fan base be with him?

The Buzz: Smart’s been one of the most sought-after coaches over the past five seasons with his name atop many athletics directors wish lists. But someone he’s never found the right fit – until now. It’s a no-brainer to bring him back to Georgia, where he played and coached during his career. He takes over a program that is just three years removed from winning its last divisional title.

4. SCOTT FROST, UCF

Pros: Frost spent time playing under some pretty big name coaches in Bill Walsh, Tom Osborne, Bill Parcells and Chip Kelly so he understands what winning entails. He was on two Nebraska teams that won national championships in 1995 and 1997. As offensive coordinator at Oregon, he helped guide the Ducks to a school-record in total offense in 2013. As quarterbacks coach, he helped work with Marcus Mariota during his Heisman-winning season in 2014. He’s a good recruiter, having brought Royce Freeman to Oregon.

Cons: He’s been a coordinator for less than a decade and has no head coaching experience. His only ties to the state of Florida came when he played for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in 2003.

The Buzz: New UCF athletics director Danny White has made it known that he’s not afraid to think outside the box when it comes to coaching hires and he did just that with this one. Frost wasn’t on anyone’s radar for this job except for White’s apparently. But that’s not to say he wasn’t a sought after commodity. His name’s come up several times for jobs over the past few years. The challenge for Frost will be to rebuild the confidence of a UCF fan base that went through a 0-12 season.

5. D.J. DURKIN, MARYLAND

Pros: Durkin worked under Urban Meyer at both Bowling Green and Florida; and spent time under Jim Harbaugh at both Stanford and Michigan. His defenses have been some of the best in the country including this season where the Wolverines are ranked fourth in the country in total defense. He’s also an incredible recruiter, securing players like D.J. Humphries and Jonathan Bullard while with the Gators.

Cons: Like many on this list, this will be his first head coaching job.

The Buzz: Durkin, 37, has been a hot commodity throughout most of his coaching career thanks to his fiery personality and pedigree under Meyer and Harbaugh. At Maryland, he’ll be taking over a program just two years into its move from the ACC to the Big Ten. There is plenty of talent aboard with at least 14 returning starters and a talent-rich area surrounding the school from which to recruit.

6. MIKE NORVELL, MEMPHIS

Pros: Norvell is one of the hottest, young assistant coaches in college football. As offensive coordinator at Arizona State, the Sun Devils never finished ranked lower than No. 38 in the country in total offense. Quarterback Mike Bercovici was third in the Pac-12 in passing yards (3,436) and fourth in passing touchdowns (26).

Cons: At 34, Norvell will be one of the youngest coaches hired this offseason. That lack of experience – he’s never been a head coach – would be the biggest detractor on the list. Memphis ranks eighth in the American Athletic Conference in 2016 recruiting class and Norvell needs to quickly secure players.