Friday Night Inc.

Friday Night Inc. Receives Approval from Clark County to Cultivate Cannabis on New Property

VANCOUVER, BC / ACCESSWIRE / November 9, 2017 / Friday Night Inc. (Friday Night) (CSE: TGIF) (FRA: 1QF) (OTC PINK: VPGDF) has received approval on its land use application from the Clark County Commissioners hearing, held on November 8th, to cultivate cannabis on the new property.

Friday Night Inc. management is scheduled to finalize and close the land purchase agreement on Monday, November 13th.

Shortly after the land purchase agreement is closed, the design team will finalize the building plans and commence construction. The necessary building permits were already submitted for and obtained by transferring the old permit numbers, which as a result, has saved valuable time in the permitting process.

About Friday Night Inc.

Friday Night Inc. is a Canadian public company, which owns, and controls cannabis- and hemp-based assets in Las Vegas Nevada. The company owns 91% of Alternative Medicine Association, LC (AMA), a licensed medical and adult-use cannabis cultivation and production facility that produces its own line of unique cannabis-based products and manufactures other third-party brands. Infused MFG, also a 91% owned subsidiary, produces hemp-based, CBD products, thoughtfully crafted of high quality organic botanical ingredients. Friday Night Inc. is focused on strengthening and expanding these operations within and outside of the state. Visit http://fridaynightinc.com.

For further information, please contact:



Joe Bleackley, Corporate Communications

604-674-4756

[email protected]

Notice Regarding Forward-Looking Statements:

This news release contains forward-looking statements. The use of any of the words "anticipate," "continue," "estimate," "expect," "may," "will," "project," "should," "believe," and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Although the Company believes that the expectations and assumptions on which the forward-looking statements are based are reasonable, undue reliance should not be placed on the forward-looking statements because the Company can give no assurance that they will prove to be correct. Since forward-looking statements address future events and conditions, by their very nature they involve inherent risks and uncertainties. These statements speak only as of the date of this news release. Actual results could differ materially from those currently anticipated due to a number of factors and risks including, inability to attract new customers in Nevada as a result of the license, the inability of the Company to take advantage of the license arrangement and various risk factors discussed in the Company's disclosure documents, which can be found under the Company's profile on www.sedar.com. Friday Night undertakes no obligation to update publicly or revise any forward-looking information, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law or the Canadian Securities Exchange.

SOURCE: Friday Night Inc.