One of the biggest whoppers Donald Trump has told on the campaign trail is the false anecdote on how he has always been opposed to the Iraq War. This simply is not true. He repeated at the debate on Saturday night and then the following morning he continued the lie. Many journalists have looked into this opposition and the only “evidence” they can find is opposition that came a year after the war started.

Steve Eder at the NY Times reported on this back in August of 2015 and yet Trump is still telling the lie:

Donald J. Trump took a moment to separate himself from his rivals by declaring that he had gone on the record with his opposition of the Iraq war some 11 years ago — in July 2004. The claim, however, left out the reality that his opposition came well after the war was already underway. The war began in March 2003. It was that next year that Mr. Trump spoke against the war, in interviews with Esquire and Larry King. “I do not believe that we made the right decision going into Iraq, but, you know, hopefully, we’ll be getting out,” Trump said on “Larry King Live” in November 2004.

In the most recent of examples, John King of CNN has called Trump out, Politifact has called Trump’s claim false as did The Atlantic.

Has that stopped him? Not at all. Just this morning on NBC, Trump continued to repeat the lie. The best part is, when Todd called him out Trump used the excuse that being a brilliant businessman and not a politician, nobody was writing about his opposition. Check it out:

But Andrew Kaczynski over at Buzzfeed has called out this crap as well. He found an excerpt from Trump’s book, ‘The America We Deserve’, where he was saying the following about Iraq and Saddam Hussein:

Consider Iraq. After each pounding from U.S . warplanes, Iraq has dusted itself off and gone right back to work developing a nuclear arsenal. Six years of tough talk and U.S. fireworks in Baghdad have done little to slow Iraq’s crash program to become a nuclear power. They’ve got missiles capable of flying nine hundred kilometers—more than enough to reach Tel Aviv. They’ve got enriched uranium. All they need is the material for nuclear fission to complete the job, and, according to the Rumsfeld report, we don’t even know for sure if they’ve laid their hands on that yet. That’s what our last aerial assault on Iraq in 1999 was about. Saddam Hussein wouldn’t let UN weapons inspectors examine certain sites where that material might be stored. The result when our bombing was over? We still don’t know what Iraq is up to or whether it has the material to build nuclear weapons. I’m no warmonger. But the fact is, if we decide a strike against Iraq is necessary, it is madness not to carry the mission to its conclusion. When we don’t, we have the worst of all worlds: Iraq remains a threat, and now has more incentive than ever to attack us.

The book was from the year 2000.

There is simply no way Donald Trump can credibly say in 2002 (when the debate over the Iraq War started) he was opposed to the war. He’s lying and the media has finally started to call him out.