Ford Performance Racing has revealed its retrospective liveries for this weekend’s Supercheap Auto Bathurst 1000.

The three factory Fords will represent two of Ford’s great victories at Mount Panorama, including the famous 1977 1-2 finish by Allan Moffat and Colin Bond.

The #5 and #6 Falcons will depict the Moffat and Bond XC Hardtops, while the #55 Bottle-O Racing car will pay homage to the 1967 race-winning Falcon of Harry Firth and Fred Gibson. The Reynolds/Canto car will compete under the number ’52.’

The liveries will be part of the celebrations around the 50th year of the Bathurst endurance race taking place at Mount Panorama this weekend.

The 1977 form finish is one of the most iconic scenes from the Bathurst 1000, and #6 Trading Post driver Will Davison says that

“The passion of our sport really comes to a head at Bathurst every single year, though perhaps never more so than this year with the 50th year celebrations and what we as a team are doing,” 2009 race winner Davison said.

“It’s an honour to go there as a factory Ford driver racing with the colours from arguably the company’s greatest moment. Our cars look amazing and I think we’ve really done justice to the 1977 team.

“We are going to Bathurst to hopefully replicate that moment for all our die hard Ford fans. There would be nothing better than to repeat that famous 1-2 finish this year with Frosty (Mark Winterbottom), Richo (Steve Richards) and Johnny Mac (McIntyre).”

Winterbottom praised FPR’s design team for capturing the likeness of the 1977 livery.

“The team has done an amazing job to accurately recreate the colour scheme and I think all V8 Supercars fans, Ford and Holden alike, will appreciate it,” the Orrcon Steel FPR driver said.

The team’s garage has also been given a makeover with new walling which carries the names of many of Ford’s past Bathurst winners plus a unique reflective design of the current car against the 1977 race winner.

The three FPR cars will join the James Moffat’s ‘Tru-Blu’ scheme and Craig Lowndes, who will reveal his Peter Brock-inspired Commodore on Wednesday.

CLICK HERE for a gallery of images of the three FPR Falcons.