Good luck getting money from

the people who wouldn't even buy the Bible

Yesterday, we learned that the Susan G. Komen for the Cure Foundation—the country's biggest breast cancer charity—is pulling its funding from Planned Parenthood, the country's biggest health care provider for women.

That makes sense, right? If women's health is your reason for existence, why would you possibly want to join forces with another organization whose reason for existence is women's health?

The excuse, according to the foundation, is that Planned Parenthood is under investigation. Of course, we know that's one hell of a flimsy excuse, since the "investigation" is nothing more than an attempt by House Republicans to put Planned Parenthood out of business.

Among the 10 billion reasons this is a stupid decision—starting with the fact that 17 percent of Planned Parenthood's services are cancer screening and prevention—is the fact that Komen is alienating the millions of women who support and depend on Planned Parenthood as their primary source of health care, and instead casting its lot with the crazy, fundamentalist anti-choice crowd who, as we all know, are never, ever satisfied.

Exhibit A, via Right Wing Watch:

Lou Engle’s Bound4Life, which pushed LifeWay bookstores to stop selling Komen’s “Pink Bible,” commended Komen but like [Family Research Council president Tony] Perkins, asked the group to go even farther to please the far-right by abandoning their support of stem cell research.

Translation: It's great that the Komen Foundation now supports women dying of cancer, but we'd really like the Komen Foundation to renounce science altogether.

But apparently, the foundation—particularly Karen Handel, its new "staunchly and unequivocally pro-life" senior vice president of public policy—thinks it's better off siding with the nation's extremists, who would rather see women die than receive health care that the little voices in their heads tell them is evil. Good luck with that.

Send an email to the Susan G. Komen Foundation and tell them what you think of this decision.