Susan Olsen, who played the youngest daughter, Cindy Brady, on The Brady Bunch, was fired from her hosting gig on a Los Angeles–based radio show after she posted a homophobic rant on Facebook.

The 55-year-old former child star spoke with openly gay actor Leon Acord-Whiting as she cohosted LA Talk Radio's Two Chicks Talkin' Politics segment on Wednesday, December 7. After the show, Acord-Whiting took to Facebook to accuse Olsen of spreading "outrageous misinformation."

"It is wildly irresponsible for LA Talk Radio to allow a Trump fanatic to co-host one of their programs, where she can spew her idiotic lies unchecked. (Being a liberal and a patriot are mutually exclusive? Hillary is causing the protests & hate crimes? The Koran is a political tract?)," he wrote, referencing the numerous topics discussed on Wednesday's episode. "As much as I love [cohost] Sheena Metal, I think LA Talk Radio needs to give 'Cindy Brady' her walking papers. I will not listen to or appear on any shows there from this point forward until she's gone. This isn't just disagreeing on, say, tax plans or foreign policy. Susan Olsen spreads outrageous misinformation & it is dangerous and unprofessional."

A day later, Olsen responded on her Facebook page, writing, "This is the little piece of human waste. He blocked himself from me before I could even get one hit in. If you can find him, please send him my love."

Acord-Whiting then took the feud a step further and shared a screenshot of an expletive-filled private message that Olsen allegedly sent him on Facebook, which read: "Hey there little p–sy, let me get my big boy pants on and Reallly take you on!!! What a snake in the grass you are you lying piece of s–t too cowardly to confront me in real life so you do it on Facebook. You are the biggest f—-t ass in the world the biggest p–sy! My D–k is bigger than yours Which ain't sayin much! What a true piece of s–t you are! Lying f—-t! I hope you meet your karma SLOWLY AND PAINFULLY."

LA Talk Radio announced on Friday, December 9, it had fired the actress in the wake of her homophobic rant. "LA Talk Radio takes pride in its close and collaborative relationship with the LGBT community, and will continue to provide a home for those who have hopeful and positive messages of togetherness and tolerance to share with our listeners," the station wrote in a statement on Facebook. "We will not tolerate hateful speech by anyone associated with our radio station and have severed our ties with a host that veered off the direction in which we are going."

Sign up now for the Us Weekly newsletter to get breaking celebrity news, hot pics and more delivered straight to your inbox!

Want stories like these delivered straight to your phone? Download the Us Weekly iPhone app now!