OMG continues their great performance, Final game comes down to epic base race

The morning begins with OMG continuing their consistent domination while the last game of the night comes down to an incredible base race.

HaoKai utilizes an early level 1 teleport to establish dominance.

VOD

Ashe taking many a tumble and hymn of valor, while Vayne has several pots.

VOD

Hey, this isn't their lane...

VOD

I know it's invisible, but you can take my word for it, the dragon was slain.

Michale “DreXxiN” Lalor Starcraft: Brood War Veteran and League of Legends Crew Lead. Events Attended 2013 [f]Poland[/f] Intel Extreme Masters Katowice

2013 [f]Germany[/f] Intel Extreme Masters World Championships

Although entering as a weak team,has been doing quite well as of recent, evenon the first day of the week.knows a lot of the strength in Wings of Aurora lies in their unique set of champions, where they banned out, a generally odd set of bans.Kicking things off straight away, HaoKai on Ryze blows teleport at level 1 to make an aggressive play on the enemy team, putting a bit of damage onto the enemy support and setting his team up with an intimidating approach. Afterwords, they would approach through top tri-bush into the purple side Lizard of the Elder, scouting the enemy Zed for a free pick and first blood on Ryze.Despite giving up the first kill of the game, LM would quickly find themselves getting back on their feet, utilizing the mobility of Shen to keep things evened up, but not without spoiling some advantages of their own with an aggressive bottom lane duo of Graves and Elise.30 minutes into the game, Livemore's support get caught out, which allows Wings of Aurora to easily contest baron. However, after a strong engage lead by Malphite, things would look a bit painful for Wings of Aurora. To their merit, their support Elise was able to secure a killing blow on baron just before dying. Afterwords, LM struggled to fight but WoA ultimately prevailed for the win.Yet another scenario of uninvited guests kick off whenfaces off against. This time, blue side didn't manage any merits and it went back to the typical farm game. Wayi Spider pulled out champions such asandthis game, very untypical picks not seen often in the western world whereas OMG went for a much more standard and safe team composition.OMG would find that paying off for them after going hyper-aggressive level one top lane with Renekton pulling off a clean 1v1 kill onto the enemy Shen. Meanwhile, Spider would find themselves pressured bottom lane due to not picking a strong AD laner to punish Vayne's dreadful laning phase.After Shen went down once, OMG knew that he would be icnredibly vulnerable there on and repeatedly dove onto him, securing 2 kills and 1 assist for their fellow Renekton and allowing some easy gold for Twisted Fate in the mid lane. Meanwhile, to stay ahead of Spider's bottom lane, Vayne would stack lifesteal with potions and outtrade everything Ashe could do with the help of Sona.Following that, it was pretty much smooth sailing for OMG, showing just how dominant they have become in the most recent weeks of the LPL. Playing like a truly top team in the world, they proceeded to take every advantage they could without throwing and took an easy win off of Wayi Spider.In the third game of the night withvs., we'd find ourselves with the only safe opening to the LPL today with both teams beginning on their own sides in the jungle. Positive Energy pulled out a Jungle Shyvana, which hasn't seen the light of day in quite some time in the western world.Though Invictus Gaming did manage to pull the first blood of the game away from PE's hands, it was onto a Thresh rather than one of the other mega threats bolstering themselves in Invictus Gaming's roster. The game was fairly passive, just like in the beginning of the game, for several minutes. That is up until...A surprise lane swap would catch Rumble by surprise, allowing the very late game scaling champion of Twitch to become infinitely stronger in the palms ofThough Positive Energy did a good job at attempting a siege on towers, the defensive timing of Invictus Gaming was much too keen to let a tower fall, even if near death.The overzealous need of objective control would end up being a largely faulted point in PE's play, throwing themselves in very disadvantageous situations and allowing iG to become even further ahead. Though being able to stay even in towers for the greater portion of the game, PE's gold deficit would prove too much to come back from, allowing iG toThe last game of the day would have the most relate-able team offacing off againstNothing flashy would happen early on in the game with the exception of brawling between CaoMei and and his lane opponent. Shortly after 5 minutes in,on sniffs out his first prey and grabs a kill, allowing the bottom lane of World Elite to get ahead in gold as well.Not letting that dissuade Royal Club from the potential win, they quickly even up the tides in kills, but lose control of dragon as well as having their mid tower fall first. Troll shows himself on a roll today, being part of every kill of World Elite's within the early phase of the game. However, with Weixiao underperforming a bit as he has been of recent, Royal Club finds themselves catching back up and controlling the dragons on their own.Royal Club would continue to find themselves mounting a great lead, as well as having superior oracle and ward control across the map. In a 23 minute attempt at baron, Royal Club rip it away from World Elite for absolutely free, giving World Elite yet another grim outlook in today's LPL.Not willing to falter once again in their performance, World Elite stay in the game despite their deficit, closing off the kill deficit and bringing the gold values extremely close and making the move on towers. With their middle inhibitor down andgoing 13-2-9 with 300 as Kassadin at this point, all seemed hopeless for World Elite now. However, in a blink of an eye and an epic bace race, World Elite kills the Nexus off faster and takes the win!