Billy Hurley III celebrates with the championship trophy after winning the Quicken Loans National golf tournament at Congressional Country Club on June 26. (Photo: Geoff Burke, Geoff Burke-USA TODAY Sports)

AKRON, Ohio – Billy Hurley III will not be playing in the British Open.

He has a wedding to go to.

Hurley's emotional victory Sunday in the Quicken Loans National came with perks, including playing spots in this week’s World Golf Championships-Bridgestone Invitational, next month’s British Open and next year’s Masters. He said Tuesday he will not be going to Scotland to play in the game’s oldest championship. Instead, he’ll be going to a house near his childhood home in Leesburg, Va., to attend the wedding of his sister, Megan.

Hurley, who received nearly 400 congratulatory text messages and emails after winning his first PGA Tour title, called his sister to tell her the news while he was playing the South Course at Firestone Country Club for the first time.

“I wouldn't miss my sister’s wedding for the world, and I think that at this point in time for me and my family and the trajectory of our family, it's very important for me to be there to support her and her new husband,” Hurley said. “It was a pretty easy decision at the end of the day. She tried to not really influence me a ton on Sunday night, but I called her while I was playing, and she started crying. I mean, so she was pretty thrilled that I'll be there.”

Hurley is pretty thrilled to be at Firestone for the first time. Recently, he thought about quitting the game. Then he played like a veteran last week at Congressional Country Club north of the nation’s capital and 30 miles from the Naval Academy in Annapolis, Md., where he earned a degree in quantitative economics and rose to the rank of lieutenant.

“I don't think they were expecting me here. My locker is kind of in the corner and there's a parking spot back in the back of the lot and everything,” Hurley said. “But happy to have just both of those this week, to be honest.”

He’ll feel pretty good going to the first tee, too.

“Any time you have success, you have the chicken and the egg of success and confidence, right, so obviously success breeds confidence, and so hopefully I can use that confidence to continue to play well throughout the rest of the season,” Hurley said.

As for the rest of the season, Hurley will keep hearing what he’s been hearing since he walked off the 18th green at Congressional, that his win is the feel-good story of the year. A story of a first-time winner, playing in a tournament honoring current and past members of the U.S. Armed services, winning 10 months after his father committed suicide.

“I'm certainly touched,” when people say it’s the feel-good story of the year, he said. “I'm a little flabbergasted just in the sense that I didn't know that many people cared that much about me. I've heard from so many grown men telling me they were watching golf crying on Sunday. I had a good friend of mine in California call and leave a message and he was fighting back tears the whole time he was leaving the message for me. So that surprised the heck out of me.

“Michael Greller, (Jordan Spieth’s caddie), said to me on the range, ‘Thanks for making us all cry.’ That's been kind of an unbelievable show of support from people that I never expected.”

PHOTOS: 2015-16 PGA TOUR WINNERS