An information technology staffer left the country the month after U.S. Rep. Timothy J. Ryan’s office fired her after learning she and several family members were under investigation for possible criminal violations of the House of Representatives rules governing IT, acquisition and personnel.

The woman is named in a criminal complaint against her husband, who was arrested on a bank fraud charge as he attempted to leave the country for Pakistan last week.

An affidavit filed with the criminal complaint filed in U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia against Imran Awan states there is probable cause to believe that Awan and his wife, Hina Alvi, engaged in a scheme to defraud the Congressional Federal Credit Union based on misrepresentations made to obtain a loan.

To read affidavit, click here

Alvi was an employee shared between Ryan’s office and other congressional offices who “provided routine IT services — maintaining official computers and blackberries, including repair of equipment, installation of new equipment and software and maintenance of printers and copying equipment,” Michael Zetts, Ryan’s communication director, stated in an email.

Alvi was fired from the position in February after the office learned of a Capitol Police investigation into Alvi, Zetts stated.

“In February 2017 our office was informed by the House Administration Committee, the House Chief Administrative Officer, the House Sergeant at Arms and the Capitol Police that Hina Alvi and other members of her family employed by other offices were under investigation by the Capitol Police for possible criminal violations of the House IT rules, acquisition rules and personnel rules. We terminated Hina Alvi’s employment immediately,” Zetts stated.

Ryan, D-Howland, and his office are cooperating with the investigation, Zetts said.

In March, federal agents searched Alvi before she and her three children boarded a flight to Doha, Qatar, on their way to Lahore, Pakistan, according to the complaint against Awan.

She had more than $12,000, and numerous pieces of luggage, including cardboard boxes filled with household goods and food, the complaint affidavit states.

Alvi left the country with the children, who were “abruptly” removed from school in Fairfax County, Virginia, and is not expected to return, though she has a return flight scheduled in September, the affidavit states.

Alvi’s husband, Awan of Lorton, Virginia, pleaded not guilty to one count of bank fraud in his first appearance July 25 in federal court. He was released pursuant to a high-intensity supervision program, including the restriction that he not travel beyond a 50-mile radius of his home, according to the court.

Awan was fired from his position as an IT staffer for Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz, D-FL, last week after his arrest.

The Republican National Committee on Monday raised questions about the security of information Alvi and Awan could have had access to.

“We have no reason to believe that any information related to our constituents has been compromised. But those questions are being investigated by the appropriate authorities,” Zetts stated.

The RNC alleges Awan and others related to him worked also for two other Ohio U.S. Reps.: Marcia Fudge, D-District 11, and Joyce Beatty, D-District 3.

FBI Special Agent Brandon Merriman said in the affidavit that the misrepresentations revolved around written assurances that the home serving as collateral for the loan was a “principal residence.”

Merriman said the credit union normally does not provide home equity lines of credit when the home used to secure the loan is a rental. That’s because they are riskier forms of collateral. The investigation, which included physical surveillance and interviews, determined the couple did not reside at the property used to secure the loan.

Awan’s attorney, Chris Gowen, said the federal bank fraud count stems from a “modest real estate matter” and is motivated by anti-Muslim bigotry. He noted that Awan is an American citizen and said “this outrageous political prosecution” was forcing his children to live in squalor in Pakistan.

He said he’s confident Awan “will soon be able to clear his name and get on with his life.”

A preliminary hearing is scheduled Aug. 21, according to Gowen.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.