Felix Rosenqvist has had a very successful start to his rookie season as a Formula E driver, as the Swede reviews his season so far and looks ahead to Buenos Aires.

During the race in Hong Kong, Rosenqvist made a small error which saw him hit the barrier and lose his rear wing.

The 25-year old managed to recover in his second car to score a point for fastest lap, but Rosenqvist left Hong Kong feeling satisfied with his overall performance.

“Normally when you end a race in the wall you do not feel that happy travelling back home!” said Rosenqvist speaking exclusively to Formula E Zone.

“But considering the whole weekend, I had a very positive feeling being at the front in almost every session. I knew I had more coming in the future races, and I managed to score one point at least for the fastest lap. So in the end, I was still happy with how it went for my first race in Formula E.”

Rosenqvist surprised the Formula E world in Marrakesh by placing his Mahindra on pole position. Although, the Swedish driver felt that after Hong Kong, a pole position was in reach.

“In Hong Kong, we saw that I had the pace to be on pole, So I had quite high expectations for myself coming to Marrakesh to qualify well. So both yes and no, it was obviously unreal to stand in front of all these great drivers – but if the right feeling is there, there’s no reason to not go for it!” explains Rosenqvist.

Despite building a big lead in the first half of the race, a few software coding glitches saw Rosenqvist lose pace to the chasing pack which demoted the rookie from first to third in the second half of the race.

The 25-year old and his engineering team have since understood how they can improve for Buenos Aires, so the problem does not happen again.

“There were many reasons for the loss of the win in Marrakesh. I cannot explain all of them right here, but for sure I was part of the reason, together with some other things. We have worked hard to not repeat this in the future, and I’m confident that I will continue to have a steep learning curve for the next couple of races onwards.”

Buenos Aires is the only track that has featured in all three seasons of Formula E, which means a number of drivers have experience of the circuit compared to Rosenqvist.

However, the Swede feels prepared for this weekend’s race and is looking forward to continuing his rookie season.

“Since many of the other drivers have raced in Buenos Aires before, we have worked really hard to make sure I can be as prepared as possible before we arrive in Argentina.”

“I’m looking forward to getting back into the M3Electro cars and feeling refreshed and confident after a well-needed break. Everyone in the team has contributed to making the most of the time since Marrakesh and we are ready to bring everything together strongly,” says Rosenqvist.