Twitter’s made it apparent for some time that four individuals in the fighting game community have had something hidden up their sleeves as of late. And now, thanks to Andre Butler of Evil Geniuses, the curtain has been raised on Fighting Game TV. Ryan “Filipino Champ” Ramirez, Long “Shady K” Tran, Ricky Ortiz, and Eduardo “PR Balrog” Perez have created a player house similar to those found in the Starcraft community to practice and hone their skills. While they plan on streaming training sessions so people can watch their progress, they’ve also set up to have a live feed of their lives 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Through a multiple camera arrangement, all your stalking fantasies have come true! Be sure to follow both of their TwitchTV channels at FGTVLive and FGTVLive2, as well as their Twitter feed at @FGTVLIVE for news and updates, and check out the entire article at Evil Geniuses. Here’s a small portion to get you started.

According to the mission statement provided to me by Shady K, the show itself will be named FGTV (Fighting Game TV, tentative title) with the premise of the show to entertain the viewers with high-level gameplay of various titles. Obviously Ultimate Marvel vs Capcom 3 and Super Street Fighter 4 Arcade Edition will be the premier titles of their stream, but no doubt they will throw in different games as well from time to time. The goal here is to try and break the current mold of fighting game related streams where viewers are forced to either watch one person play through laggy online matches or against the same opponent over and over. Another goal is to be as interactive with the stream and their viewers as possible. No more “anti-social” behavior between the streamer and the viewers. All 4 roommates will answer questions, make jokes, and overall participate with the viewers in the stream experience. If that alone is not enough to make you want to watch, keep in mind that these aren’t just 4 top players picked at random. Ricky Ortiz, Shady K, PR Balrog, and Filipino Champ have friendships made over years and years of tournaments, competitive play, international travel, and real life experiences. If you’re not familiar with them already, the stream will display all 4 roommates in the genuine personalities- from the brash, outspoken language of Filipino Champ, sarcastic demeanor of Shady K, bold and boastful dialogue from PR Balrog, and the ever so ferocious Ricky Ortiz.

Source: Evil Geniuses